
KENNETH W. MCCRAVY
BIOGEOGRAPHY:
A BRIEF INTRODUCTION
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
2

﻿
Biogeography: a brief introduction
1st edition
© 2016 Kenneth W. McCravy & bookboon.com
ISBN 978-87-403-1332-1
Peer review: Shawn Meagher, Ph.D., Department of Biological Sciences,
Western Illinois University
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
3

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION          Contents
CONTENTS
1                                           What is Biogeography?                    6
1.1                                         References and Further Reading           8
2                                           Biogeography - Development and History   9
2.1                                         Introduction                             10
2.2                                         Early Biogeography                       10
2.3                                         Exploration and Biogeography             10
2.4                                         Further Botanical Contributions          15
2.5                                         How Old is the Earth?                    17
2.6                                         Darwin, Wallace, and Evolution           19
2.7                                         Explaining Disjunctions                  24
2.8                                         Late 20th Century Progress               28
2.9                                         References and Further Reading           29
3                                           Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes     31
3.1                                         Introduction                             31
3.2                                         Map Projections                          31
Free eBook on
Learning & Development
By the Chief Learning Officer of McKinsey
Download Now
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
4

                                       BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                 Contents
3.3                                    Geographic Ranges and Range Maps                   35
3.4                                    The Dynamic Earth                                  37
3.5                                    References and Further Reading                     41
4                                      Evolution - Descent with Modification              43
4.1                                    Introduction                                       43
4.2                                    Early Evolutionary Thought                         43
4.3                                    Mechanisms of Evolution                            45
4.4                                    Speciation                                         50
4.5                                    Reconstructing Evolutionary Histories              52
4.6                                    References and Further Reading                     55
5                                      Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity                  56
5.1                                    Introduction                                       56
5.2                                    Hierarchy of Ecological Organization               56
5.3                                    Major Biomes of the World                          59
5.4                                    Patterns in the Earth’s Biodiversity               78
5.5                                    References and Further Reading                     84
6                                      Islands and Oceans                                 85
6.1                                    Introduction                                       86
6.2                                    Island Formation                                   87
6.3                                    Getting There and Surviving There                  87
6.4                                    Patterns of Species Richness on Islands            90
6.5                                    The Marine Environment                             93
6.6                                    Structure of the Marine Environment                95
6.7                                    References and Further Reading                     104
7                                      Historical Biogeography                            106
7.1                                    Introduction                                       106
7.2                                    Early Life and Biogeography of the Paleozoic Era   106
7.3                                    Biogeography of the Mesozoic Era                   116
7.4                                    Biogeography of the Cenozoic Era                   122
7.5                                    References and Further Reading                     137
8                                      Human Evolution and Biogeography                   138
8.1                                    Introduction                                       138
8.2                                    Human Evolution                                    138
8.3                                    Agriculture and Animal Domestication               150
8.4                                    The Anthropocene                                   155
8.5                                    Human Impacts on Other Species                     159
8.6                                    Anthropogenic Climate Change                       164
8.7                                    References and Further Reading                     168
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
5

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    What is Biogeography?
1   WHAT IS BIOGEOGRAPHY?
Your goals for this chapter are to learn about:
• Te kinds of questions that biogeographers ask
• Te interdisciplinary nature of biogeography
Why are polar bears found in the Arctic, but not the Antarctic? How do ground beetles end
up on isolated oceanic islands? Why is the flora and fauna of Australia so unique? How did
humans make it to the New World, and what was their impact on other forms of life there?
Questions about the distribution of life on Earth have been asked since the time of Aristotle
and before. Seeking answers to these questions is the province of the science of biogeography -
the study of spatial and temporal patterns of biological diversity, or biodiversity. Biodiversity
is the variation present in the biological world, and this term can refer to variation at different
scales: genetic, population, species, community, and ecosystem.
At the most fundamental level, biogeography seeks to inventory the plants and animals of
particular geographic locations and ecological habitats. Such basic information can be critically
important in, for instance, assessing the changes in biodiversity that result from such causes
as habitat fragmentation or climate change. But the more interesting questions tend to be
the “how?” and especially the “why?” questions such as the ones listed above. Traditionally,
questions that biogeographers ask are divided into two categories, historical biogeography
and ecological biogeography. Historical biogeography, as the term suggests, focuses on long
term processes that unfold over evolutionary or geological time periods, and often involves
large scale geographic areas and taxa that are extinct. Ecological biogeography, on the other
hand, generally deals with shorter time periods, smaller geographic scales, and extant taxa.
Study of the effects of plate tectonics on the distribution of dinosaur fossils is an example of
historical biogeography; investigation of the relationship between tropical mountain elevation
and species diversity of butterflies would fall under the purview of ecological biogeography.
Biogeography is also often subdivided into phytogeography (the study of plant distributions)
and zoogeography (the study of animal distributions). But of course the biogeography of
plants and animals is highly intertwined, so it is difficult if not impossible to study one group
without substantial reference to the other.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
6

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 What is Biogeography?
Biogeography is a highly integrative science. As is apparent from the name, at the basic level
biogeography is a synthesis of biology and geography. But biogeography integrates knowledge
from many different fields. Biogeography goes hand-in-hand with evolutionary biology and
systematics; the role of geographic isolation is a central one in evolution, as observed by,
among others, Charles Darwin almost two centuries ago. Genetics plays an essential role here
of course; isolation leads to and maintains genetic differentiation and speciation. Ecology,
physiology and climatology are also important in biogeography. Te distributions of organisms
are constrained to a great degree by factors such as presence of predators and parasites,
competition for food and other resources, and the organism’s own physiological abilities to
survive and reproduce in particular climatic conditions. Unraveling of past distributions of
organisms depends to a great extent on the study of fossil forms - paleontology. As a matter
of fact, the importance of fossils in our biogeographical understanding has led to the new sub-
discipline of paleobiogeography. Finally, the science of geology has contributed enormously
to our understanding of the forces that shape biogeographical patterns. As Dennis McCarthy
points out in his book Here Be Dragons: How the Study of Animal and Plant Distributions
Revolutionized Our Views of Life and Earth, biogeography really represents a unification of
the fundamental theories of two natural sciences, the theory of evolution by natural selection
(biology) and the theory of plate tectonics (geology).
In addition, biogeography is highly relevant to more applied fields such as conservation biology
and human ecology. Habitat destruction and the spread and establishment of invasive species
are major threats to biodiversity that are strongly intertwined with biogeography, and evidence
suggests that animal and plant distributions are already being influenced by anthropogenic
climate change. A thorough understanding of biogeographical principles will be required to
understand and successfully meet these challenges.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
7

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  What is Biogeography?
In the following chapters, the fundamentals of biogeography will be presented. After an
overview of the history of the development of biogeography as a science, we will examine
plate tectonics and evolution, the bedrock concepts of geology and biology. We will then
focus on ecology and patterns of biodiversity, marine biogeography, and the biogeography
of islands. An overview of biogeographical patterns over geological time periods will follow.
We will then conclude with a discussion of human biogeography and the impacts of humans
on the biogeography of other species. Hopefully, this book will provide an introduction to
further study, and stimulate an interest in, as Charles Darwin put it in an 1845 letter to the
eminent botanist Joseph Hooker, “that grand subject, that almost keystone of the laws of
creation, Geographical Distribution.”
1.1                                                                                                 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Cox, CB & Moore, PD 2010, Biogeography: an ecological and evolutionary approach, 8th edn.
John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Lomolino, MV, Riddle, BR, Whittaker, RJ & Brown, JH 2010, Biogeography, 4th edn. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts.
McCarthy, D 2009, Here be dragons: how the study of animal and plant distributions revolutionized
our views of life and Earth. Oxford University Press, New York.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
8

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                         Biogeography - Development and History
2   BIOGEOGRAPHY - DEVELOPMENT
AND HISTORY
Your goals for this chapter are to learn about:
•                                                                          How science progresses
•                                                                          How biogeography is, in one sense, a young science, but in another sense an ancient
science
•                                                                          Linnaeus’ major contributions to science
•                                                                          How the Christian worldview of the 18th and 19th centuries limited progress in
biogeography
•                                                                          Linnaeus’ “paradisical mountain” concept, and Comte de Buffon’s criticisms of it
•                                                                          Te contributions of the major botanists to biogeography in the late 18th to early
19th centuries
•                                                                          Te importance of the work of Charles Lyell to evolutionary biology and biogeography
•                                                                          Te fundamental concepts of the theory of evolution by natural selection
•                                                                          Te evidence for natural selection that Darwin found while on his voyage aboard
the HMS Beagle
•                                                                          Te work of Alfred Russel Wallace, who shares credit with Darwin for the theory of
evolution by natural selection
•                                                                          Disjunct distributions, and how late 19th century biogeographers attempted to explain
these distributions
•                                                                          Te theory of plate tectonics, and how it provided a plausible explanation for
gondwanan distributions such as that of the seed fern genus Glossopteris
•                                                                          Te major advances in biogeography in the latter half of the 20th century
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
9

                                                                                                     BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION   Biogeography - Development and History
2.1                                                                                                  INTRODUCTION
In his influential book, Te Structure of Scientific Revolutions, the philosopher of science
Tomas Kuhn suggested that scientific progress does not occur in a consistent, accumulative
fashion, but rather is punctuated by periodic “paradigm shifts” in which the accepted view
is, in a relatively short period of time, radically transformed. While there is disagreement
among scientists and philosophers as to what constitutes a paradigm shift and how often
they occur, it is clear that the view held by most non-scientists of scientific progress as a dry,
orderly, stepwise process, achieved by following the scientific method in a cookbook fashion,
is inaccurate. In reality, science is messier, but far more interesting than this, with many blind
alleys, controversies, arguments, and conflicting data. Science is conservative by nature, in
the sense that it takes overwhelming evidence to overturn an existing paradigm. Tis can be
viewed as a self-regulating mechanism. While science and scientists must, of course, be open
to consideration of new ideas, these ideas must have some evident merit to be considered
seriously. As the late great astrophysicist and popular science author Carl Sagan once stated, “It
pays to keep an open mind, but not so open your brains fall out.” Te history of the science
of biogeography is a fascinating story that illustrates how science progresses, both in terms of
the ideas put forth as well as the people who formulated them. Science is people-driven, and
the science of biogeography has had more than its share of interesting personalities.
2.2                                                                                                  EARLY BIOGEOGRAPHY
Biogeography has only been recognized as a formal, distinct scientific discipline for a few
decades, but humans have been studying plant and animal distributions for centuries and
even millennia. It may not be too much of a stretch to think of early hunter-gatherer humans
as primitive biogeographers in the sense that a working knowledge of distributional patterns
of game animals and edible plants was essential to their survival. In historical times, early
Greek philosophers contemplated the distributional patterns of nature; among his many
other questions about the nature of things, Aristotle (384-322 BCE) asked how life arose
and spread, and formulated an early classification of living things. Aristotle’s successor,
Teophrastus (371-287 BCE) focused on botany, and wrote voluminously on classification
of plants based on a variety of characteristics, including locality. Teophrastus is sometimes
referred to as the “father of botany.” Although these early attempts to understand biodiversity
were fraught with assertions we would consider absurd, they also included insights that were
quite impressive even by today’s standards.
2.3                                                                                                  EXPLORATION AND BIOGEOGRAPHY
Knowledge of the world’s flora and fauna accelerated greatly in the 18th century during a
period known as the “age of exploration.” European explorers and naturalists were travelling,
collecting and cataloging specimens from throughout the world. It became apparent that a
system was needed to organize and classify the astounding diversity of organisms that were
being discovered and collected.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
10

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                      Biogeography - Development and History
About 2,000 years after Teophrastus, a man whose name would become synonymous with
biological classification was born in the village of Råshult, in southern Sweden. Carolus
Linnaeus (1707-1778) believed that God put him on Earth to devote his life to describing
and cataloging the natural world (Fig. 2.1). To borrow a phrase from the 1980s movie Te
Blues Brothers, it could be said that Linnaeus considered himself to be on a “mission from
God” to explain the mysteries of the “divine museum.” Te two achievements for which
Linnaeus is most well-known (and that make him so beloved by students of biology when
learning scientific names J) are the Linnaean classification system and the system of binomial
nomenclature. Te former was a hierarchical system that classified and organized living things
based on their similarities; it is a system that is still used in revised form today. Te latter, also
still in use, is a system of naming species that includes a unique, two part (genus and specific
epithet) scientific name for each species. But in addition to naming and classification, Linnaeus
was also driven to explain the origin, spread, and distribution of life. Linnaeus documented
his work in four major publications: Systema Naturae, Species Plantarum, Genera Plantarum,
and Philosophia Botanica.
Figure 2.1: Carolus Linnaeus, the father of modern taxonomy (Wikipedia
‘Carl Linnaeus;’ Attribution: Nationalmuseum press photo, cropped with
colors slightly adjusted; 1866: transferred to Nationalmuseum from
Gripsholm Castle)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
11

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Biogeography - Development and History
Like other naturalists of his time, Linnaeus lived within the framework of a Christian
worldview, and his thinking was subject to this constraint. He believed that God created all
species at one time and at a single location. Furthermore, these species, as well as the Earth
and its climate, were immutable, that is, they were unchanging and could not adapt to new
conditions. So how could these immutable species have come to occupy their suitable habitats
throughout the world? Linnaeus proposed the existence of an equatorial “paradisical mountain,”
an island-mountain where creation took place. When the waters receded and the landmasses
expanded, the various species dispersed to their new locations and habitats throughout the
world. Because high elevation tropical mountains include different habitats, from lowland
tropical forests to high altitude tundra, this paradisical mountain allowed for the creation
of the different species within their appropriate habitats, so that when the species dispersed,
they were well suited for their new location.
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent
the wheel we reinvent
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new
markets provide both opportunities and challenges.
An environment in which your expertise is in high
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere
within our global group and benefit from international
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing
light every day.
Light is OSRAM
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
12

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Biogeography - Development and History
Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (1707-1788) was a contemporary of Linnaeus
and an accomplished naturalist in his own right (Fig. 2.2). He noted a couple of problems
with Linnaeus’ paradisical mountain hypothesis. First, Buffon noted that different regions
of the world, even those with similar environmental conditions, had different species. Tis
observation would become known as Buffon’s law, and is a basic principle of biogeography.
Tis is unlike what would be expected if each habitat of the paradisical mountain supplied
species for that habitat type throughout the world. Second, if species could not adapt, then
how could they survive when moving from the mountain through areas with unfavorable
environmental conditions to get to their suitable habitats and locations?
Figure 2.2: Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, one of
the most influential naturalists of the late 18th century
(Wikipedia ‘Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon;’
Attribution: Musée Buffon à Montbard)
Like Linnaeus, Buffon believed in a single creation event, but Buffon hypothesized a northern
origin of life during a warm period in the Earth’s climate. Ten, as the climate cooled, species
dispersed south, adapting to their new environments. Tose species that did not adapt died
out. We now know that Buffon’s hypothesis, like Linnaeus’, was off the mark. But Buffon’s
ideas provided an important advance: he recognized the dynamic nature of the Earth, its
climate, and its species. Buffon also provides a good example of how science often progresses;
he proposed an imperfect hypothesis, but contained within that hypothesis were valuable
ideas upon which others could build.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
13

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Biogeography - Development and History
An important explorer of the mid-to-late 18th century was Captain James Cook, who, although
not a scientist, was accompanied by three accomplished naturalists of the period: Sir Joseph
Banks (1743-1820), Johann Reinhold Forster (1729-1798), and his son Johann Georg
Adam Forster (1754-1794). In particular, the elder Forster made important contributions
to plant biogeography (Fig. 2.3). He verified that Buffon’s law applied to plants as well as
animals, recognizing that distinct plant assemblages are associated with similar environmental
conditions in different regions. He also made important contributions regarding patterns of
plant diversity and island biogeography, observing that plant diversity increases with decreasing
latitude (i.e., approaching the equator) and that larger islands with more varied habitats tend
to have greater numbers of plant species than do smaller islands.
Figure 2.3: Johann Reinhold Forster (left) and his son Johann Georg Adam
Forster (Wikipedia ‘Johann Reinhold Forster;’ Attribution: 1775-80 painting by
John Francis Rigaud)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
14

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Biogeography - Development and History
2.4                                                                                                FURTHER BOTANICAL CONTRIBUTIONS
Knowledge of phytogeography was expanding rapidly by the end of the 18th century, driven by
botanists such as the elder Forster, Karl Willdenow (1765-1812), Alexander von Humboldt
(1769-1859), and Augustin de Candolle (1778-1841). Tis period marked the culmination
of the historical period known as the “age of enlightenment,” in which reason and analysis
were emphasized, and the influence of traditional authorities such as the Catholic church
declined. Te values of the enlightenment influenced and were reflected in the work of these
naturalists. Karl Willdenow wrote a major work synthesizing knowledge of plant distributions
in relation to climate. He also proposed an explanation of plant distributions based on
multiple simultaneous creations in many different places rather than a single creation event.
Willdenow was a friend and mentor of Alexander von Humboldt (Fig. 2.4), and introduced
Humboldt to botany. Humboldt traveled extensively, particularly in the Neotropics. He
wrote many important works; his Essay on the Geography of Plants was a major contribution to
science, graphically illustrating the relationships between plants and climate. Humboldt also
expanded Forster’s observations on latitudinal gradients of biodiversity to include altitudinal
gradients. Te importance of Humboldt’s insights to the field of biogeography is reflected in
his recognition as the “father of phytogeography.” Candolle made important contributions to
knowledge of plant dispersal and the barriers to this dispersal. He studied the adaptations that
plants show in response to climatic conditions such as heat and moisture, and also stressed
the importance of competition for resources as a factor in determining plant distributions.
His work on these abiotic and biotic limiting factors led to his recognition of distinct floral
geographic regions. His ideas on competition also led him to develop the concept of “nature’s
war,” which Charles Darwin would later use in his principle of natural selection.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
15

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                   Biogeography - Development and History
Figure 2.4: Alexander von Humboldt, the “father of phytogeography”
(Wikipedia ‘Alexander von Humboldt;’ Attribution:
http://www.avh.de/en/stiftung/namenspatron/portrait.htm)
360°
thinking.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers                        © Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
16

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                                        Biogeography - Development and History
2.5                                                                                               HOW OLD IS THE EARTH?
As the 18th century came to a close, biogeographical knowledge was accelerating, but was
still primarily descriptive in nature. Te “how and why” explanations for the patterns found
by these early naturalists were still elusive. One major impediment to progress was a lack
of understanding and acceptance of the ancient age of the Earth. At this time, it was still
commonly thought by most people, including many naturalists, that the Earth was only a
few thousand years old, based on biblical interpretations. But by the late 18th and early 19th
centuries, some geologists were challenging this view.
Charles Lyell (1797-1875), the “father of geology,” was the most prominent of these (Fig. 2.5).
Lyell was a proponent of “uniformitarianism,” a view which, among other things, asserted that
the Earth’s geological features are the result of gradual processes such as erosion and uplift
that take place very slowly and over very long periods of time. Furthermore, these processes
and rates were the same in the past as in the present. Tis was in contrast to proponents of
“catastrophism,” who believed that geological features are primarily the result of short-lived
but violent events that were more common and intense in the past. Uniformitarianism led
Lyell to the inevitable conclusion that the Earth is much older than a few thousand years;
incredibly long periods of time were required to produce the present day geological features
of the Earth. Lyell was convinced that the Earth was several hundred million years old;
we now know even that was a vast underestimate of the Earth’s age. Many of the patterns
observed in the biological world were incongruous with the young-Earth view. Acceptance by
the scientific community of the ancient age of the Earth paved the way for new and exciting
ideas in biogeography.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
17

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                           Biogeography - Development and History
Figure 2.5: Charles Lyell, the “father of geology”
(Wikipedia ‘Charles Lyell’; Attribution: 1840 painting by Alexander Craig)
We will turn your CV into
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
Send us your CV on
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
www.employerforlife.com
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
18

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                               Biogeography - Development and History
2.6                                                                                              DARWIN, WALLACE, AND EVOLUTION
Sir Isaac Newton once said “if I have seen further than others, it is by standing upon the
shoulders of giants.” Charles Darwin (1809-1882) would likewise stand on the shoulders of
the scientific giants mentioned in the preceding paragraphs. As a young man in his 20s, Darwin
(Fig. 2.6) would embark on a voyage of discovery that would revolutionize our view of life.
Tis voyage began in 1831, when Darwin was invited to serve as naturalist and a companion
to Captain Robert FitzRoy on board the HMS Beagle. Tis five-year voyage circumnavigated
the Earth, sailing from England across the Atlantic, along the coast of South America and
returning via Australia and South Africa (Fig. 2.7). During this voyage, Darwin collected many
rocks, fossils, plants, and animals, particularly in South America and the Galápagos Islands.
Preceding the voyage, Darwin firmly believed in the literal truth of the Bible and its account
of creation, and fully expected to find this truth reflected in the natural world - that the
same or similar species would be found in geographically separate locations that had similar
environments, as Linnaeus had predicted.
Figure 2.6: Charles Darwin, whose voyage aboard the HMS Beagle
would lead him to the theory of evolution by natural selection
(Wikipedia ‘Charles Darwin;’ Attribution: Late 1830s portrait by
George Richmond, from Origins, Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
19

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Biogeography - Development and History
Figure 2.7: Charles Darwin’s voyage on the HMS Beagle (Wikipedia ‘Second voyage of HMS Beagle;’
Attribution: Webmaster at the German language Wikipedia)
However, Darwin consistently found the opposite - similar species tended to occur in close
geographic proximity, regardless of differences in environment. Te bird life of the Galápagos
Islands serves as an example. On the islands, Darwin collected birds that he thought represented
a variety of groups such as blackbirds, wrens, grosbeaks, and finches. He preserved these birds
and, upon returning to England, gave them to the famous ornithologist John Gould for
identification. Darwin was surprised to learn that these birds represented several species of
an odd group of ground finches found nowhere else on Earth, but which were closely related
to finches found on the South American continent. Darwin’s logical conclusion was that an
ancestral South American species had colonized the Galápagos, and then over time radiated
and adapted to the various available ecological niches on the islands. Tis adaptive radiation
was particularly evident in the sizes and shapes of the finches’ beaks, reflecting adaptation to
various food sources.
Fig. 2.8 illustrates this in four of the species. Te large ground finch (#1 in the figure), with
its massive beak, specializes in cracking and eating large, tough seeds it finds on the ground.
Te medium ground finch (#2 in the figure), with a smaller but still stout beak, also eats seeds,
but a greater variety, and its smaller beak gives it greater flexibility to supplement this diet
with a variety of other foods such as leaves, buds, and insects. Te small tree finch (#3 in the
figure) has a beak that is smaller still and slightly curved, well adapted for grasping its primary
food, insects, off of the surfaces of leaves and branches, and also to bite through small stems
to get to the insects inside. Te green warbler finch (#4 in the figure) uses its thin, pointed
beak to probe in plant litter, mosses, etc. for insects and spiders.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
20

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                         Biogeography - Development and History
Figure 2.8: Four species of Darwin’s finches (Wikipedia ‘Darwin’s finches;’ Attribution:
Journal of Researches into the Natural History and Geology of the countries visited
during the voyage of H.M.S. Beagle round the world,
http://biodiversitylibrary.org/page/2010582)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
21

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Biogeography - Development and History
Although Darwin considered the fossil record too incomplete to provide a very detailed record
of evolution, he did point out that fossils in more recent geological strata were more similar
to living organisms than were fossils in deeper strata. He also noted that fossil mammals in
a particular area are more closely related to living mammals of that area than to fossils from
the same stratum in different geographical regions, again suggesting that living species were
descended from extinct species that had existed in the same location.
By the time Darwin returned to England in 1836, he was becoming convinced that species
evolve from pre-existing ones. However, he still did not know of a mechanism by which
this could occur. He read Tomas Malthus’ An Essay on the Principle of Population, in which
Malthus pointed out that unchecked population growth would inevitably outstrip the food
supply. Darwin connected Malthus’ work with Augustin de Candolle’s earlier ideas on “nature’s
wars,” the struggle for existence among organisms. Darwin thus recognized the following facts:
--                                                                                                 Individuals in a population vary
--                                                                                                 Much of this variation is inherited
--                                                                                                 In any population, a large proportion of offspring die before reaching reproductive age
From these facts, Darwin concluded that, since organisms vary in their biological traits, some
of these traits must be advantageous and therefore give those individuals that possess them
an “edge” in survival and reproduction. Tese individuals would on average produce more
offspring, and their advantageous traits would increase in the population. Te concept is
straightforward, but the implications profound; indeed, the theory of evolution by natural
selection is one of the most important scientific advances in history, and is the unifying
theory of biology. Philosopher of science Daniel Dennett, in his book Darwin’s Dangerous
Idea, stated that “If I were to give an award for the best single idea anyone ever had, I’d give
it to Darwin, ahead of Newton and Einstein and everyone else. In a single stroke, the idea of
evolution by natural selection unifies the realm of life, meaning, and purpose with the realm
of space and time, cause and effect, mechanism and physical law.” While an award for “best
idea ever” is certainly open for debate, there can be no doubt that the theory of evolution by
natural selection ranks with the most brilliant and revolutionary ideas in history.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
22

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Biogeography - Development and History
It was over two decades after Darwin returned to England before he published the first edition
of his famous book, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation
of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, in 1859. Reasons for this delay may have included
illness and uncertainty over the reception it might receive, but Darwin was also busy with
family life as well as other professional projects and obligations. But this delay in publication
of his theory almost caused Darwin to be “scooped.” Another accomplished naturalist, Alfred
Russel Wallace (1823-1913) combined his observations in South America and the Malay
Archipelago with Malthus’ ideas on population growth to formulate the theory of evolution by
natural selection. In his autobiography, Wallace (Fig. 2.9) relates how he thought of Malthus
and natural selection while bedridden with fever in the East Indies.
Wallace and Darwin corresponded with each other, and each influenced the thinking of the
other. During these correspondences, Wallace sent Darwin an essay outlining his ideas, which
Darwin immediately recognized as very similar to his own. Te details of what happened
next are sketchy. Darwin passed the manuscript along to his friend Charles Lyell, but there
is disagreement among scholars about whether he did this immediately, or held Wallace’s
manuscript for weeks. It is difficult to know what was going through Darwin’s mind. If
Wallace’s manuscript were published, it would take precedence; Darwin’s originality and life’s
work would be trumped. Trough the intervention of Charles Lyell and Joseph Hooker, it
was arranged for Wallace’s essay to be read along with some of Darwin’s writings at the 1858
Linnaean Society of London meeting, thus assuring joint credit for the theory. Wallace may
forever be known as the answer to a favorite biology trivia question, “who was the other guy?”
But there is no need to feel sorry for Alfred Russel Wallace, for he would become known
to history as a preeminent scientist and naturalist in his own right. Wallace would publish
twenty books and 500+ scientific articles, and would develop biogeographical concepts and
principles that are still important today. His contributions to the field of biogeography are
so important that many consider him to be the “father of biogeography.”
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
23

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Biogeography - Development and History
Figure 2.9: Alfred Russel Wallace, who many consider the “father of
biogeography;” he independently conceived the theory of evolution by
natural selection (Wikipedia ‘Alfred Russel Wallace;’ Attribution: London
Stereoscopic & Photographic Company, in Borderland Magazine, April 1896)
2.7                                                                                                EXPLAINING DISJUNCTIONS
By the late 1800s, scientists such as Lyell, Darwin, Wallace, and others had provided convincing
evidence that the Earth was ancient and that species change over time, thus overcoming two
worldviews that were limiting the progress of the science of biogeography. But perplexing
questions remained. In particular, certain unusual distributions, known as                         “disjunct”
distributions, presented a problem. A disjunct distribution is a distributional pattern in
which the range of a taxonomic group is discontinuous, with wide geographical separations.
How did such distributions occur? Tis was difficult to explain. Some biogeographers, such
as Darwin, invoked dispersal as the major mechanism by which disjunctions occurred. While
the dispersal abilities of many taxonomic groups are impressive, this seemed insufficient as an
explanation for distributions such as that of the fossil plant genus Glossopteris (Fig. 2.10), a
Permian seed fern which is widespread in South America, Africa, Madagascar, India, Antarctica
and Australia. Tese plants were woody, seed-bearing shrubs or trees, some of which reached
30 m in height. Barriers to dispersal from continent to continent seem unsurmountable. Te
seeds of this plant are too large to have been dispersed by wind, and unlikely to have floated
across the ocean.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
24

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                      Biogeography - Development and History
Figure 2.10: Fossils of Glossopteris, a Permian seed
fern with a disjunct southern hemisphere distribution
(Wikipedia ‘Glossopteris;’ Attribution: Daderot)
AXA Global
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
25

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                               Biogeography - Development and History
Charles Lyell and others suggested that such distributions were the result of ancient land
bridges which had connected the continents but had since submerged. In particular, the British
botanist Joseph Hooker (1817-1911) studied the distributions of Southern Hemisphere flora
extensively, but couldn’t accept dispersal as an explanation for the disjunct distributions he
observed. As was the case with other scientists of the day, Hooker believed that the positions
of the continents were fixed, and concluded that ancient land bridges were the most logical
explanation. But Darwin and the dispersalists found these post-hoc explanations, with little
or no supporting evidence, unconvincing.
Such distributions would elude explanation until the early 1900s, when arguments for the
possibility of continental movement, led by the German geophysicist and meteorologist Alfred
Wegener (1880-1930), gained momentum. Wegener’s theory of continental drift was first
published in 1912 and revised periodically until his death in 1930 on a research expedition
in Greenland. Wegener (Fig. 2.11) provided compelling biological and geological evidence
for continental movement, but despite the strength of his arguments and the weaknesses of
the opposition’s, his theory was not generally accepted until over 30 years after his death.
Acceptance of Wegener’s theory was hampered by lack of a known mechanism by which
the continents could move, but also by the close-mindedness and lack of imagination of
entrenched “establishment” scientists. Te fact that Wegener was not a geologist but an
“outsider” (atmospheric scientist) did not help matters in the latter respect. It wasn’t until
the 1960s, over 30 years after his death, that irrefutable geological evidence made denial
of Wegener’s theory (now known as the theory of plate tectonics) untenable for even the
most diehard opponents. Acceptance of the dynamic nature of the Earth’s landmasses would
clarify the enigmatic distributions of Glossopteris and other taxa with southern hemisphere or
“gondwana” distributions (Fig. 2.12).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
26

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                            Biogeography - Development and History
Figure 2.11: German geophysicist and meteorologist Alfred Wegener, who is best known
for his theory of continental drift (Wikipedia ‘Alfred Wegener;’ Attribution: Loewe, Fritz;
Georgi, Johannes; Sorge, Ernst; Wegener, Alfred Lothar)
e Graduate Programme
I joined MITAS because
for Engineers and Geoscientists
I wanted real responsibili                                                                    www.discovermitas.com
Month 16
a construction                                                                                I was
supervisor in
the North Sea
advising and
                                                                                              Real work                                helping foremen
International                                                                                 opportunities
ree work placements                                                                                                                    solve problems
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
27

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Biogeography - Development and History
Figure 2.12: Gondwana distributions of several taxa on continents that are now widely
separated, suggesting they were once connected (Wikipedia ‘Alfred Wegener;’ Attribution:
United States Geological Survey)
2.8                                                                                                LATE 20TH CENTURY PROGRESS
Te last half-century has witnessed increased importance of biogeography as a major field
of interdisciplinary research. Te 1966 publication of Phylogenetic Systematics by German
entomologist Willi Hennig (1913-1976) brought to the forefront the cladistics approach to
biogeographical classification. In cladistics, evolutionary relationships of taxa are uncovered
based on shared unique characteristics present in the most recent common ancestor but not in
earlier ancestors. Tis approach would prove to be an important bridge between evolutionary
biology and biogeography. Likewise, the application of molecular genetics approaches has
made it possible to investigate evolutionary and biogeographical patterns in the relatively
recent past. Phylogeography, an approach developed by John Avise (1948-                            ), focuses on
geographically structured genetic patterns among populations within a species, and has many
applications in conservation biology, public health, and even the study of language origins.
Another major development in the last half of the 20th century was the maturation of the science
of ecology and its integration with biogeography. Important work in ecological biogeography
in the 1960s and 70s focused on the biotic and abiotic factors that influence the distribution
of biological diversity. Important research in ecological biogeography also included seminal
studies in the area of island biogeography by two of the most influential biologists of the
20th century, the late Robert MacArthur (1930-1972) and Edward O. Wilson (1929-                    ).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
28

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Biogeography - Development and History
Marine biogeography might be thought of as the “final frontier” in the field of biogeography.
In general, we know much less about the organisms that inhabit the oceans than we do about
terrestrial organisms. Tis is understandable because it is much more difficult to observe and
sample marine organisms, particularly those that are great distances from land, or at great
depths. As a consequence, knowledge of marine biogeography has grown much more slowly and
recently than knowledge of terrestrial biogeography. But the pace of growth of our knowledge
of marine distributions is increasing, thanks to a great extent to increased abilities to explore
the deeper regions of the ocean as well as satellite technology that has revealed patterns in
the distributions of oceanic planktonic life.
Te history of the growth of biogeography reflects the integrative and multidisciplinary nature
of the field. From basic early descriptions of animal and plant distributions the science has
developed explanatory power that can help address some of today’s most pressing environmental
problems. In the rest of this book we will review in more detail the principles of biogeography
and their applications to today’s challenges.
2.9                                                                                                 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Avise, JC 2000, Phylogeography: the history and formation of species. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Costa, JT 2014, Wallace, Darwin, and the origin of species. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Cox, CB & Moore, PD 2010, Biogeography: an ecological and evolutionary approach, 8th ed.
John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Darwin, C 1859, On the origin of species. John Murray, London.
Dennett, DC 1995, Darwin’s dangerous idea: evolution and the meanings of life. Simon and
Schuster, New York.
Hennig, W 1966, Phylogenetic systematics, 3rd edn. University of Illinois Press, Champaign.
Kuhn, TS 1962, Te structure of scientific revolutions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lomolino, MV, Riddle, BR, Whittaker, RJ & Brown, JH 2010, Biogeography, 4th edn. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts.
MacArthur, RH & Wilson, EO 1967, Te theory of island biogeography. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
29

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Biogeography - Development and History
McCarthy, D 2009, Here be dragons: how the study of animal and plant distributions revolutionized
our views of life and Earth. Oxford University Press, New York.
Wallace, AR 1889, Darwinism: an exposition of the theory of natural selection with some of its
applications. Macmillan and Company, London.
Wegener, A 1966, Te origin of continents and oceans. Translated by John Biram. Dover
Publications, New York.
Wikipedia 2015, ‘Aristotle,’ ‘Teophrastus,’ ‘Carl Linnaeus,’ ‘Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte
de Buffon,’ ‘Johann Reinhold Forster,’ ‘Carl Ludwig Willdenow,’ ‘Alexander von Humboldt,’
‘Augustin Pyramus de Candolle,’ ‘Charles Lyell,’                                                    ‘Charles Darwin,’                        ‘Second voyage of
HMS Beagle,’ ‘Darwin’s finches,’ ‘Alfred Russel Wallace,’ ‘Glossopteris,’ ‘Alfred Wegener,’
https://en.wikipedia.org/
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
Length: 1O MONTHS
THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
PROFESSIONAL GOALS
Format: FULL-TIME
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
EXPERIENCE
5 Specializations                                                                                   #10 WORLDWIDE                            55 Nationalities
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
Personalize your program                                                                            in class
FINANCIAL TIMES
www.ie.edu/master-management                                                                        mim.admissions@ie.edu                    Follow us on IE MIM Experience
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
30

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
3   MAPS, RANGES, AND
GEOLOGICAL CHANGES
Your goals for this chapter are to learn about:
• Te three basic categories of map projections
• Te usefulness and limitations of geographic range maps
• Evidence for the theory of plate tectonics
• Pangea, Laurasia, and Gondwana
• Climatic effects of plate tectonics
3.1                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION
Te science of biogeography focuses on the distribution of biodiversity across the globe. But
before we can intelligently address the distribution of biodiversity, there are two fundamental
questions we must address that relate to this focus: 1) how do we represent the surface of the
earth on a two-dimensional surface so that we can adequately communicate information about
these distributions, and 2) how and why does the surface of the earth (and therefore, our
representations of it) change over time. Tese two questions will be the subject of this chapter.
3.2                                                                                                 MAP PROJECTIONS
All of us use maps in a variety of ways - to get from one place to another without getting
lost, to estimate the distance between two points, to find the location of an unfamiliar place
where an important social or political event is taking place, and, in the case of biogeographers,
to study the distribution of biodiversity. But have you ever wondered how maps are made, or
thought about exactly what information is being conveyed by a map? A map can be defined
as a two-dimensional representation of the Earth. But, as most of us are now aware, the Earth
is not flat. So how can we represent the surface of a roughly spherical object on a flat surface?
A map projection is the “flattening” of a curved surface into a plane.
As the famed German mathematician Carl Gauss (1777-1855) proved, a curved surface
cannot be represented on a plane without distortion. Te type of distortion varies with the
type of map projection. Tere are many varieties of map projections, but most fall into three
broad categories: cylindrical, conic, and azimuthal. Tere is no single, objectively “best” map
projection; the usefulness of any given type of projection depends on the use for which it
is intended.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
31

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
A cylindrical projection of the earth can be imagined as a projection of the earth onto a
cylindrical sheet of paper, with the cylinder tangentially touching the earth at, for example, the
equator. A well-known cylindrical projection is the standard Mercator projection (Fig. 3.1). In
this projection, objects such as landmasses are distorted as one moves from the equator toward
the poles. For instance, Greenland appears much larger than Australia in Fig. 3.1. However,
comparing the true area of the two landmasses, we see that in reality Australia is over 3.5
times as large as Greenland (Fig. 3.2). Fig. 3.3 shows Tissot’s indicatrix, which indicates the
distortion at various points for, in this case, the standard Mercator projection. On a spherical
globe, the dots would all be equal sizes.
Figure 3.1: Mercator projection of the world between 82°S and 82°N
(Wikipedia ‘Mercator projection;’ Attribution: Daniel R. Strebe,
August 15, 2011)
Figure 3.2: Comparison of actual land areas of Australia and Greenland
(Wikipedia ‘Mercator projection;’ Attribution: Benjamin Hell
(User: Siebengang))
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
32

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                             Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
Figure 3.3: Tissot’s Indicatrices on the Mercator projection; on a spherical
globe, the dots would all be equal sizes (Wikipedia ‘Mercator projection;’
Attribution: Stefan Kühn)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
33

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                              Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
In conic projections, we can visualize a conical sheet of paper intersecting the earth at
two standard parallels, resulting in little distortion between the parallels, but increasing
distortion with distance away from the parallels. For instance, in an Albers conic projection
using standard parallels of 20°N and 50°N, North America is depicted with little distortion,
but southern hemisphere landmasses are increasingly distorted, particularly in an east-west
direction (Fig. 3.4). Azimuthal projections, which can be visualized as a flat sheet of paper
contacting the globe at a central point, provide an accurate depiction of regions near the
central point and distances/directions from the central point, but elsewhere shapes and sizes
become distorted (Fig. 3.5).
Figure 3.4: Albers projection of the world with standard parallels 20°N and 50°N
(Wikipedia ‘Albers projection;’ Attribution: Daniel R. Strebe, August 15, 2011)
Figure 3.5: Polar azimuthal equidistant projection (Wikipedia ‘Azimuthal
equidistant projection;’ Attribution: Daniel R. Strebe, August 15, 2011)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
34

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
For large-scale maps, the transverse Mercator projection, a variant of the standard Mercator
projection, is probably the most commonly used. For the transverse Mercator projection, the
axis of the cylinder lies along the equatorial plane, and the line of tangency is any chosen
meridian, which is designated as the central meridian. Tis projection allows construction
of highly accurate large-scale maps anywhere on Earth. For smaller-scale maps that include
whole continents or even the entire world, a variety of projections are used, depending on
the purpose of the map.
3.3                                                                                                 GEOGRAPHIC RANGES AND RANGE MAPS
Once the type of map for a given purpose and geographic location has been chosen, a range
map, which represents the geographic distribution of a taxonomic group, can be constructed.
Tere is a variety of factors, at ecological as well as evolutionary time scales, that determine
the geographic range of an organism. Tese include such abiotic factors as temperature,
humidity, soil moisture and pH, and nutrient availability, as well as biotic interactions such
as competition, predation, parasitism, and mutualistic associations. Human activities and
anthropogenic climate change have the potential to affect geographic ranges on a global scale.
Knowing the distributions of organisms is important for a variety of reasons. As we saw in the
last chapter, knowledge of geographic ranges provides insight into the evolutionary history
and evolutionary relationships of organisms. Such knowledge is also critical in conservation
efforts. In particular, as human activities continue to affect the abundance and distributions of
other organisms, documentation of geographic ranges allows us to assess and possibly mitigate
these effects. Information on geographic ranges, such as that found in popular field guides,
also helps promote interest in conservation among the general citizenry by helping them to
become familiar with the biodiversity in their geographic region.
Tere are different approaches to mapping geographic ranges of organisms, and these approaches
can differ considerably in their degree of detail. It is important to recognize the limitations
and usefulness of these different types of range maps. For instance, a map providing only an
outline of the geographic range of the Eurasian lynx, Lynx lynx (Fig. 3.6), gives one a general
idea of where the species is found over a large geographic area. But of course these cats are
not uniformly distributed throughout their range, and the map provides no information
regarding the relative abundance of the species in different locations within its range, which
varies from relatively abundant in Siberia to very low in parts of Europe. Some range maps
provide more detail by using such approaches as dots or contour lines/colors to depict the
relative abundances of organisms within the geographic range. But such information must be
available before it can be incorporated into a range map, and for the vast majority of species,
particularly small-bodied, hyper-diverse groups such as many invertebrate taxa, such detailed
information is lacking.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
35

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
Figure 3.6: Eurasian lynx and its geographic range (Wikipedia ‘Eurasian lynx;’ Attribution: mpiet
(http://www.mindbox.at/gallery/))
Using range maps, there are several terms that biogeographers commonly use to describe the
occurrence of a taxon in space and time. An extinct taxon is one that no longer has living
members, whereas an extant taxon contains living members. An endemic taxon is one that is
only found in one location or geographic area. For instance, emus are endemic to Australia.
A taxon that is found in geographic areas that are separated from each other (i.e., has a
discontinuous range) is said to have a disjunct distribution. Te extinct Glossopteris, discussed
in chapter 2, exhibits a disjunct gondwana distribution. Te extant Kerry slug, Geomalacus
maculosus, is widespread in Spain and Portugal, but also has disjunct populations in County
Kerry, southwestern Ireland. A relict taxon is one that “has seen better days” and was once
more geographically widespread or taxonomically diverse. Te thylacine, or Tasmanian tiger,
survived as a relict population on the island of Tasmania until the 1930s, even though it had
disappeared from mainland Australia centuries earlier.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
36

                                                                                                      BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION   Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
3.4                                                                                                   THE DYNAMIC EARTH
As noted in Chapter 2, the belief in a static Earth was a major impediment to progress in
the science of biogeography. But in the early 1900s, Alfred Wegener (Fig. 2.11) drew upon
evidence such as the “gondwanan distributions” of certain fossils (Fig. 2.12), patterns of
coal deposits, and stratigraphy (layering) of rocks along coastlines to propose the theory of
continental drift. However, for reasons outlined in Chapter 2, it was decades before Wegener’s
theory was accepted by the scientific community. Te famous broadcaster and naturalist Sir
David Attenborough relates an experience that he had at his university in the 1940s. When
he asked one of his lecturers about Wegener’s theory, the lecturer replied that “the idea was
moonshine.” (McKie, Robin; 28 October 2012; “David Attenborough: Force of Nature;” Te
Observer (London)). It wasn’t until the 1960s that Wegener’s ideas were widely accepted. Two
lines of evidence supported Wegener’s theory: 1) paleomagnetism, and 2) seafloor spreading.
Paleomagnetism refers to the existence of magnetized particles in rocks. Tese magnetized
particles align themselves with the Earth’s magnetic field, and the orientation of the particles is
locked in when the rocks harden. Tus, the position of the rock relative to the magnetic field
at the time of solidification is preserved. If the Earth’s landmasses have not moved relative to
each other, then all the magnetic particles should be oriented in the same direction. Instead,
these particles vary in their orientation based on the ages of the rocks, and provide a record
of the pathways of movement of the continents over time.
In the past 5 years we have drilled around
95,000 km
—that’s more than twice around the world.
Who are we?
We are the world’s leading provider of reservoir characterization,
drilling, production, and processing technologies to the oil and
gas industry.
Who are we looking for?
We offer countless opportunities in the following domains:
n Operations
n Research, Engineering, and Manufacturing
n Geoscience and Petrotechnical
n Commercial and Business
We’re looking for high-energy, self-motivated graduates
with vision and integrity to join our team.                                                           What will you be?
careers.slb.com
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
37

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                      Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
Te second, and even more compelling source of evidence, was the discovery of the existence of
spreading ridges, where new seafloor is formed, and trenches, where the old seafloor disappears
into the Earth. Tus, the Earth’s surface is composed of a number of tectonic plates (Fig. 3.7).
Te spreading ridges and trenches produce something of a “conveyor belt effect,” moving the
plates that contain ocean floor and continents relative to each other or, where a ridge exists
under a continent, splitting the continent. Te rate of movement varies among the different
tectonic plates, but is said to average about 2.5 cm per year, or about the same rate that your
fingernails grow. However, over the course of hundreds of millions of years, this slow rate
of movement produces dramatic changes in the positions of the continents. Because the age
of the seafloor varies depending on time of formation, positions of the continents at a given
time in geological history can be estimated by removal from the map of any seafloor produced
since that time. Because seafloor older than about 180 million years has disappeared into the
trenches, paleomagnetism must be used to estimate continental positions before that time.
Figure 3.7: The tectonic plates of the world (Wikipedia ‘Plate tectonics;’ Attribution: United States
Geological Survey)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
38

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
Te dramatic changes that have taken place with regard to the positions of the continents are
illustrated by their positions at various time points during relatively “recent” geological history.
If we look at the Earth about 300 million years ago, in the late Carboniferous, the Earth’s
landmasses formed a large supercontinent, Pangea (Fig. 3.8), surrounded by a “super ocean,”
Panthalassa. By about 200 million years ago, at the Triassic/Jurassic boundary, the landmasses
were separating into two supercontinents (Fig. 3.9). Te northernmost one, Laurasia, would
drift northward after the split. It contained most of the landmasses that presently occupy
the northern hemisphere. Te southernmost supercontinent, Gondwana, included most of
today’s southern hemisphere landmasses, and after its separation from Laurasia would drift
further south.
Figure 3.8: Map of Pangaea with modern continental outlines
(Wikipedia ‘Pangaea;’ Attribution: en:User:Kieff)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
39

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                             Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
Figure 3.9: Map of Laurasia and Gondwana in the late Triassic/early Jurassic
(Wikipedia ‘Laurasia;’ Attribution: User:LennyWikidata)
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:
“The perfect start
of a successful,
international career.”
CLICK HERE
to discover why both socially
and academically the University
of Groningen is one of the best
places for a student to be
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
40

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
Plate tectonics and the movements of the continents affect the Earth’s dynamics in many
different ways, particularly climatically. As the landmasses change latitudinal positions, their
climate changes as a result of increased or decreased direct solar radiation. During periods
when landmasses are located at the poles, the formation of ice sheets increases the Earth’s
albedo, or reflectivity. A higher albedo means reduced absorption of solar radiation, resulting
in cooling of the Earth and potential increased glaciation. Joining and separation of landmasses
also affects the influence of oceans on climate; large contiguous landmasses tend to have more
continental climatic conditions in the interior regions that are far away from coastlines, whereas
the climates of smaller landmasses are more subject to the ocean’s influence. Continental
movements also affect patterns of ocean currents, and tectonic formation of mountain ranges
affects climate through the formation of rain shadows and other effects.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the discipline of biogeography pulls together two of the most
important theories in science: the theory of plate tectonics, and the theory of evolution by
natural selection. An understanding of the interplay between these two forces is essential to
an understanding of the past and present distributions of biological diversity. In the next
chapter, we will examine the theory of evolution by natural selection.
3.5                                                                                                  REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Anderson, PB 2015, Map projections, http://www.csiss.org/map-projections/index.html
Andrewartha, HG & Birch, LC 1954, Te distribution and abundance of animals. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Brown, JH, Mehlman, DW & Stevens, GC 1995, ‘Spatial variation in abundance’, Ecology,
vol. 76, no. 7, pp. 2028-2043.
Budd, AF & Pandolfi, JM 2010, ‘Evolutionary novelty is concentrated at the edge of coral
species distributions’, Science, vol. 328, no. 5985, pp. 1558-1561.
Gaston, KJ 2003, Te structure and dynamics of geographic ranges. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Kirkpatrick, M & Barton, NH 1997, ‘Evolution of a species’ range’, Te American Naturalist,
vol. 150, no. 1, pp. 1-23.
Lomolino, MV, Riddle, BR, Whittaker, RJ & Brown, JH 2010, Biogeography, 4th edn. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
41

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                               Maps, Ranges, and Geological Changes
Mott, CL 2010, ‘Environmental constraints to the geographic expansion of plant and animal
species’, Nature Education Knowledge, vol. 3, no. 10, p. 72.
Oreskes, N, ed. 2003, Plate tectonics: an insider’s history of the modern theory of the Earth.
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Parmesan, C 2006, ‘Ecological and evolutionary responses to recent climate change’, Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics, vol. 37, pp. 637-669.
                                                                                                 Wikipedia 2015, ‘Mercator projection,’   ‘Carl Friedrich Gauss,’   ‘Eurasian lynx,’   ‘Albers
projection,’                                                                                     ‘Azimuthal equidistant projection,’      ‘Plate tectonics,’        ‘Pangaea,’         ‘Laurasia,’
https://en.wikipedia.org/
American online
LIGS University
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc,
DBA and PhD  programs:
▶▶                                                                                               enroll by September 30th, 2014 and
▶▶                                                                                               save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶                                                                                               pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶                                                                                               Interactive Online education
▶▶                                                                                               visit www.ligsuniversity.com to
find out more!
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed
by the US Secretary of Education.
More info here.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
42

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Evolution - Descent with Modification
4   EVOLUTION - DESCENT
WITH MODIFICATION
Your goals for this chapter are to learn about:
• Early evolutionary ideas and thinkers
• Te hypothesis of inheritance of acquired characteristics and its rejection
• Mechanisms of evolution
• Te theory of evolution by natural selection
• Types of natural selection
• Types of speciation
• Reproductive isolating mechanisms
4.1                                                                                                  INTRODUCTION
Te theory of evolution by natural selection is the bedrock theory of biology, and is fundamental
to an understanding of the geographic distribution of biological diversity. As the renowned
evolutionary biologist Teodosius Dobzhansky famously stated, “nothing in biology makes sense
except in the light of evolution.” Tis statement is equally true for biogeography as well. In this
chapter, we will briefly review some of the earliest pre-Darwinian ideas regarding biological
evolution before moving to a discussion of modern evolutionary theory and its implications.
4.2                                                                                                  EARLY EVOLUTIONARY THOUGHT
At the most basic level, “evolution” simply means a pattern of change over time. Te concept
of biological evolution is forever linked to Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace,
but the idea that populations and species change over time actually predates these two
biologists. Pre-Socratic philosophers such as Anaximander (610-546 BC) and Empedocles
(490-430 BC) viewed animals and plants as products of change or recombination over
time. Empedocles specifically introduced the idea of chance into the equation. Tese
views contrasted to those of later philosophers such as Plato (ca. 428-348 BC), Aristotle
(384-322 BC) and Zeno (334-262 BC), who proposed that species did not change because
they were perfectly designed. Tese teleological explanations of design with purpose would
become influential in Christian philosophy over a century later. In contrast to Christianity,
adherents of eastern philosophies and religions have had an easier time accepting the
concept of biological evolution, and incorporating it into their belief systems. Taoism, for
example, rejects the concept of biological immutability, and Taoist philosophers such as
Zhuang Zhou (c. 369-286 BC) believed that species developed varying characteristics as
a result of living in different environments. Later, the Islamic world would also produce
forward-thinking individuals who anticipated evolutionary thought. Probably the most advanced
of these was the Persian scientist and philosopher Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1201-1274; Fig. 4.1),
who even recognized the unity that humans share with the rest of the biological world.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
43

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                        Evolution - Descent with Modification
Figure 4.1: Early Persian scientist and philosopher Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
(Wikipedia ‘Nasir al-Din al-Tusi;’ source unknown)
Other scientists noted patterns in the variation among species and attempted to provide explanations
for these patterns. One such notable explanation involved “inheritance of acquired characteristics,” an
idea generally associated with the French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744-1829; Fig. 4.2).
In this view, physical changes acquired by an organism over the course of its lifetime can
be passed on to its offspring. A classic example is that of giraffe evolution; according to the
concept of inheritance of acquired characteristics, early giraffes continually stretched their
necks to reach higher and higher tree branches. Tis made their necks longer and stronger,
and these characteristics were then passed on to their offspring. Inheritance of acquired
characteristics was a widely accepted idea for decades, but greater understanding of the
mechanisms of inheritance led to rejection of this idea by the early 1900s. Even so, Lamarck’s
efforts in providing a theoretical framework for biological evolution paved the way for further
advances in the field.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
44

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Evolution - Descent with Modification
Figure 4.2: French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (Wikipedia ‘Jean-
Baptiste Lamarck;’ Attribution: 1802-03 painting by Charles Thévenin)
4.3                                                                                                    MECHANISMS OF EVOLUTION
As the title of this chapter suggests, a good working definition of biological evolution is “descent
with modification.” Knowledge of genetics as the basis of inheritance was not widely known
in Darwin’s time, but now we have a more specific definition of evolution: change in allele
frequencies in a population. Tere are several mechanisms by which this occurs:
--                                                                                                     Mutation - a change in the sequence of bases in an organism’s DNA. A mutation
is important in evolution only if it is passed to future generations, thus providing
increased genetic diversity and the raw material on which natural selection can act.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
45

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                          Evolution - Descent with Modification
--                                                                                          Genetic drift - change in allele frequencies within a population as a result of chance.
Genetic drift is particularly important in small populations, in which random genetic
events have disproportionately large effects. For example, if a particular allele is rare
in a small population, and none of the few individuals who have this allele reproduce,
then that allele completely disappears from the population, and genetic variation is
reduced. Two special cases in which genetic drift is important are 1) the founder
effect, and 2) genetic bottlenecks. In the founder effect, a small number of individuals
disperse from their original population and found a new, isolated population. Tis
new population may have allele frequencies that are not representative of the original
population; certain traits may be more or less frequent in the new population. One
well known example of this is the frequency of the recessive allele for Ellis-van Crevald
syndrome among Pennsylvania Amish, which is much higher than that of the larger
parent population in Switzerland. Genetic bottlenecks occur when a population
undergoes a dramatic decline, resulting in the random elimination of many alleles
from the population. Tis results in long-term loss of genetic diversity, even if the
population recovers. Cheetahs provide a classic example. In the last 10,000 years,
habitat change due to climate and human persecution in the 1800s have driven
cheetah numbers down to a few thousand individuals, resulting in highly inbred,
low diversity populations.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
46

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Evolution - Descent with Modification
--                                                                                                Migration - when individuals enter (immigrate) or leave (emigrate) a population, they
bring or take their alleles with them. If their allele frequencies are not representative of
the population as a whole, this results in change in allele frequencies in the population.
--                                                                                                Natural selection - individuals with certain alleles have more offspring. Tis changes
the allele frequencies in a population by favoring those that contribute to survival and
reproduction and selecting against those that do not. Tis mechanism of evolution is
the most important in shaping the adaptations of populations to their environments
and has been a driving force in the evolution of the planet’s biodiversity.
Recognition of natural selection as a driving mechanism of evolution was the major contribution
of Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace (see Chapter 2). Te theory of evolution by
natural selection can be stated as follows:
--                                                                                                Within a population, there is variation among individuals, and much of this variation
is heritable, that is, due to differences among alleles.
--                                                                                                Te environment contains limited resources, and more individuals are born than
can possibly survive.
--                                                                                                Individuals compete for these limited resources; some individuals have characteristics
that make them more likely to survive and reproduce.
--                                                                                                Over time, advantageous traits (alleles) are favored and disadvantageous traits are
selected against, leading to an increase in the frequency of beneficial alleles and
descent with modification within the population.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
47

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Evolution - Descent with Modification
Given enough time, natural selection can significantly change the allele frequencies and
characteristics of populations, giving rise to new species. Tere are three ways in which natural
selection can affect the characteristics of a population. Te most common way is through
directional selection (Fig. 4.3, top), in which selection pressures move the population toward
an extreme phenotype. A classic example is provided by Peter and Rosemary Grant’s decades-
long studies of Galápagos finches (better known as “Darwin’s finches”). At this location,
the climate varies year-to-year from very wet to very dry. During wet years, small seeds are
plentiful, and the finches prefer these. But during dry years, the food supply shifts toward
larger, tougher seeds. Tis provides directional selective pressure for increased frequency of
larger, tougher beaks in the finch population. In stabilizing selection (Fig. 4.3, middle),
intermediate phenotypes are favored and extreme phenotypes are selected against. Human
birth weights provide an example. Babies of low birth weight tend to be unhealthy and prone
to infections, and babies of high birth weight are often associated with difficult childbirths.
Babies of intermediate birth weights have lower mortality rates. In disruptive selection
(Fig. 4.3, bottom), probably the rarest type of selection, extreme phenotypes are favored and
intermediate phenotypes are selected against. For example, say a population of mice varies
in color, with some individuals having very dark fur, some having very light fur, and some
intermediate in color. If these mice lived in an area with some patches of very dark soil and
other patches of very light soil, then the dark-colored mice would be able to avoid predation
by blending in with the dark colored soil, the light-colored mice would be able to blend in
with the light colored soil, but the intermediate-colored mice wouldn’t blend in anywhere,
and so would be more susceptible to predation. Over time, this would result in selection in
favor of the extreme colors, and against the intermediate coloration.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
48

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                         Evolution - Descent with Modification
Figure 4.3: The three types of natural selection. A (red) represents the
original population and B (blue) the population after selection.
(Wikipedia ‘Selection (biology);’ Attribution: Ealbert17)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
49

                                                                                                         BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION   Evolution - Descent with Modification
4.4                                                                                                      SPECIATION
For speciation to take place, populations must be isolated from each other so that little or no gene
flow takes place between them, allowing the populations to diverge along their own evolutionary
pathways. Eventually, enough genetic changes occur so that if the populations regain contact,
they are reproductively isolated from each other. Speciation can occur as the result of several
geographic scenarios. Probably the best known scenario is allopatry. In allopatric speciation
(Fig. 4.4, left), a population is split into two or more populations that are isolated from each other
through some vicariant (splitting) event, such as formation of a geographical barrier (mountain
range, river valley, desert, etc.). With no gene flow among the resulting populations, the new
populations diverge evolutionarily in response to environmental selective pressures, genetic
drift, or both, and, given enough time, can evolve into separate species. Peripatric speciation
(Fig. 4.4, second from left) is similar and may be considered a special case of allopatric
speciation; in peripatric speciation, a small subgroup of the original population may colonize
another habitat or ecological niche peripheral to the original population and, if isolated,
speciation may result. In parapatric speciation (Fig. 4.4, second from right), a population
may consist of two subpopulations with a narrow zone of overlap, perhaps due to a partial
geographic barrier or some other cause. Tis reduced gene flow could then lead to dimorphic
or behaviorally distinct subpopulations, further reducing the frequency of mating and gene
flow between subpopulations, and ultimately resulting in enough evolutionary divergence for
speciation to occur. Lastly, sympatric speciation (Fig. 4.4, right) occurs among populations
that share the same geographic range. Sympatric speciation may be most common among
bacteria which can undergo abrupt genetic change through horizontal gene transfer. Among
multicellular organisms, sympatric speciation is probably most common among plants. Tis
is because many plants are prone to polyploidy, or production of extra chromosome sets.
Tis results in reproductive isolation of the polyploid population from its parent population,
and potential speciation. But it is also possible that polyploidy in plants could lead to
sympatric speciation among animals such as pollinating insects that have close associations
with these plants. Disruptive selection (see previous section) could also theoretically lead to
sympatric speciation.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
50

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Evolution - Descent with Modification
Figure 4.4: Comparison of four types of speciation
(Wikipedia ‘Speciation;’ Attribution: Ilmari Karonen)
Based on the biological species concept, a population becomes a separate species when
its members evolve traits so that they can then no longer breed with other populations
and produce viable, fertile offspring. Tese reproductive isolating mechanisms can take
several forms. Prezygotic isolating mechanisms prevent fertilization of the egg, and
include                                                                                            1) temporal isolation, in which different species are reproductively active at
different times,                                                                                   2) habitat isolation, in which mating is prevented because the species
live in different habitats, 3) behavioral isolation, in which different species have different
mating rituals, mating calls, etc., 4) mechanical isolation, in which the genitalia of different
species are incompatible, or, in the case of plants, they have different pollinators, and
5) gametic isolation, in which the gametes of different species are incompatible. Postzygotic
isolating mechanisms, which operate after fertilization, include 1) hybrid inviability (zygote
does not develop or individual never reaches maturity), and 2) hybrid infertility (hybrid
offspring survive to maturity but are unable to reproduce). In terms of avoidance of wasted
energy (and wasted gametes), prezygotic isolating mechanisms are the most efficient. In some
cases, reproductive barriers between species may involve multiple isolating mechanisms.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
51

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Evolution - Descent with Modification
4.5                                                                                               RECONSTRUCTING EVOLUTIONARY HISTORIES
Carolus Linnaeus gave us his system of hierarchical classification, which is still in use in
modified form today. Linnaeus’ original purpose was to develop a system that would allow
us to categorize and organize the bewildering diversity of life on Earth, and his system still
serves this important function. However, Darwin and Wallace provided us with a second
important function of biological classification - to organize the world’s biodiversity, past
and present, based on evolutionary relationships. But, as we will see, this task is easier said
than done. Tere have been numerous approaches to this problem, but the most widely used
modern approach to biological classification is cladistics, or phylogenetic systematics, first
popularized by the German entomologist Willi Hennig in the 1950s-60s. Hennig’s approach
is to organize taxa into “clades;” a clade is a group of taxa that includes a common ancestor
and all of its descendants. But how do we achieve this? Hennig reasoned that the evolutionary
history of organisms is reflected in the modifications of the characteristics of the common
ancestor. If these modifications could be ordered into a sequence, then these ancestral and
derived character states would provide evidence for reconstructing the evolutionary history
of these related taxa, resulting in an evolutionary tree, or cladogram, of these taxa.
Top master’s programmes
Join the best at
                                                                                                  •                                       33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc
                                                                                                  International Business
the Maastricht University
                                                                                                  •                                       1st place: MSc International Business
                                                                                                  •                                       1st place: MSc Financial Economics
School of Business and
                                                                                                  •                                       2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
                                                                                                  •                                       2nd place: MSc Economics
Economics!                                                                                        •                                       2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
                                                                                                  •                                       2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012;
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
(Elsevier)
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
www.mastersopenday.nl
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
52

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Evolution - Descent with Modification
A clade that includes a common ancestor and all of its descendants is considered a “natural” group,
and is monophyletic (Fig. 4.5). Monophyletic clades are constructed based on derived character
states, or apomorphies. In particular, shared derived character states, or synapomorphies, are
evidence of close evolutionary relatedness. Plesiomorphies, on the other hand, are ancestral
character states retained by descendants, and do not necessarily imply close relatedness.
Cladograms consisting of monophyletic clades are constructed as a series of branching events
which are based on changes from plesiomorphic to apomorphic character states. Of course, it
is possible, and even likely, that more than one possible cladogram can be constructed from
a set of characters. In this case, cladists generally consider the most parsimonious cladogram
(the one requiring the fewest evolutionary changes) to be the most likely.
Figure 4.5: Cladogram of the primates, demonstrating the concepts of monophyly, paraphyly,
and polyphyly (Wikipedia ‘Cladistics;’ Attribution: Original work by Petter Bøckman, revised by
Peter Brown)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
53

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                        Evolution - Descent with Modification
According to cladistics systematists, any grouping other than a monophyletic one is biologically
artificial, and to be avoided. Types of groups that fall into this latter category include paraphyletic
and polyphyletic groups (Fig. 4.5). A paraphyletic group includes a common ancestor, but
excludes one or more monophyletic descendant taxa. For example, in a cladogram of the
Order Primates, the taxonomic grouping Prosimii (lemurs, lorises, and tarsiers) would be
paraphyletic because it would exclude the descendant clade Simiiformes (new and old world
monkeys, apes, and humans), as shown in Fig. 4.5. Another example of a paraphyletic group
is the traditional vertebrate class Reptilia. Tis class includes the common ancestor of all the
amniote vertebrates (vertebrates that lay their eggs on land, or the fertilized egg is retained
within the mother). However, the traditional class Reptilia excludes the birds and mammals,
so it is a paraphyletic group, and therefore is considered an artificial grouping by cladists.
Likewise, the group of hymenopterans commonly referred to as “wasps” would be paraphyletic
if it excludes the bees and ants, which are descended from a common ancestor with the wasps.
A polyphyletic group is even more alarming to cladists; such a group includes two or more
widely separated evolutionary lineages that lead to two or more common ancestors before
reaching a common ancestor. Basically, it is any taxon that cannot be called monophyletic
or paraphyletic. Polyphyletic groups are often based on homoplasies, which are biological
similarities that do not reflect recent shared common ancestry (i.e., apomorphies). Homoplasies
are similarities produced by convergent evolution (the evolution of similar traits independently).
For instance, as shown in the cladogram of the primates in Fig. 4.5, including lorises and
tarsiers together based on night-active behavior (a trait that evolved independently in the two
groups) would result in a polyphyletic grouping.
Evolution by natural selection has been a driving force generating the astounding variety of
life on Earth. In the next chapter we will focus on the Earth’s biological diversity, how it is
assembled, and how it can be measured.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
54

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Evolution - Descent with Modification
4.6                                                                                                   REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Bergstrom, CT & Dugatkin, LA 2012, Evolution. W.W. Norton, New York.
Cox, CB & Moore, PD 2010, Biogeography: an ecological and evolutionary approach, 8th edn.
John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Darwin, C 1859, On the origin of species. John Murray, London.
Lomolino, MV, Riddle, BR, Whittaker, RJ & Brown, JH 2010, Biogeography, 4th edn. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts.
Pallen, M 2009, Te rough guide to evolution. Rough Guides, London.
Wallace, AR 1889, Darwinism: an exposition of the theory of natural selection with some of its
applications. Macmillan and Company, London.
Wikipedia 2015, ‘History of evolutionary thought,’ ‘Nasir al-Din al-Tusi,’ ‘Jean-Baptiste Lamarck,’
‘Disruptive selection,’ ‘Natural selection,’ ‘Speciation,’ ‘Cladistics,’ https://en.wikipedia.org/
Zimmer, C 2006, Evolution: the triumph of an idea. Harper Perennial, New York.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
55

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
5   ECOLOGY, BIOMES,
AND BIODIVERSITY
Your goals for this chapter are to learn about:
• Te hierarchy of ecological organization
• Te large-scale patterns and causes of the Earth’s climatic variation
• Major biomes of the world
• Ways that biodiversity is measured
• Te importance of scale in biodiversity measurement
• Taxonomic, spatial, and temporal patterns of biodiversity
5.1                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
Ecology is that branch of science that focuses on relationships and interactions among
organisms and their environment. As such, ecology is closely tied to evolution, since these
interactions over long periods of time lead to evolutionary changes. Ecology is also intimately
related to biogeography; the abundance and distribution of species are greatly affected by their
interactions with each other and their physiological limits. In this chapter we will examine
these interactions and some of the ways in which we can measure and quantify the diversity
of the organisms involved in these interactions.
5.2                                                                                                    HIERARCHY OF ECOLOGICAL ORGANIZATION
In ecology, a population is defined as a group of actually or potentially interbreeding organisms
of the same species occupying a given location at the same time. Populations exhibit the life
history traits of their species, and are subject to the forces of natural selection. In the previous
chapter we discussed ecological populations in the context of evolution of new species. All of
the populations of different species that occupy the same area are referred to as a community,
and a community plus the abiotic environment (air, water, temperature, humidity, minerals,
etc.) is an ecosystem. Te consistency and predictability of communities across a landscape
has been greatly debated, particularly among plant ecologists of the early                             20th century.
Frederic Clements (1874-1945) viewed plant communities as relatively well-defined units,
with certain species repeatedly associated with each other. Clements viewed the change over
time of vegetation cover in a community as a series of successional stages, almost like the
development of an organism, finally resulting in a well-defined climax community composed
of coevolved species whose interactions are important in maintaining the cohesiveness of the
community. Clements’ views were very influential among plant ecologists, but Henry Gleason
(1882-1975) and others challenged these views, proposing a more individualistic concept
in which plant associations are more idiosyncratic and composed of a collection of species
responding to their own individual requirements.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
56

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Across a landscape, a mosaic of patches forms interacting communities and ecosystems. On
a more regional scale, recognizable biomes, based on the dominant plant types, are the result
of prevailing climatic conditions. A biome is a large-scale regional community with fairly
recognizable flora and fauna. Te varying climatic conditions across the Earth’s surface are in
turn the result of many factors, including the tilt of the Earth as it rotates around the sun,
large scale air and ocean currents, and topographic features of the Earth. Te Earth’s axial tilt
remains at the same angle (about 23.4°) as it rotates around the sun. Tis means that, when
the north pole is directed toward the sun, it is summer in the northern hemisphere and winter
in the southern hemisphere, because the sun’s rays are striking the Earth more directly in the
northern hemisphere and more obliquely in the southern hemisphere. During those times of
the year when the south pole is directed toward the sun and the north pole away, the seasons
are reversed. However, because of the roughly spherical shape of the Earth, equatorial regions
receive relatively consistent direct radiation from the sun throughout the year, and so these
regions are consistently warm year-round.
Te Earth’s air circulation patterns also play a great role in shaping large-scale climatic patterns.
Because the surface of the Earth is relatively warm at the equator, the warm surface air currents
moving from north and south tend to rise there, forming the intertropical convergence zone,
a low-pressure area of rising warm air. Because of the spinning of the Earth on its axis from
west to east, six air circulation cells are formed, three in each hemisphere (Fig. 5.1). Tese
cells are areas of ascending and descending air that form low and high pressure air masses.
Te Earth’s spinning produces the Coriolis effect, a deflection in the pattern of air circulation
to the right, or clockwise, in the northern hemisphere and to the left, or counterclockwise, in
the southern hemisphere. Te Coriolis effect, combined with the effects of the landmasses,
produces a general pattern of ocean currents moving clockwise in the Northern hemisphere
and counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere (Fig. 5.2).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
57

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Figure 5.1: Map showing air circulation cells in relation to trade winds on the
Earth’s surface. (Wikipedia ‘Trade Winds;’ Attribution: Kaidor)
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
58

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Figure 5.2: Patterns of movement of the ocean currents. (Wikipedia ‘Ocean current;’
Attribution: Dr. Michael Pidwirny, U.S. Government)
Te combination of all of the above factors plays a great role in determining the climatic
patterns we see across the Earth’s surface. For instance, as the warm air of the intertropical
convergence zone rises, it cools and loses its moisture in the form of rainfall. Tus, warm
tropical conditions predominate in the equatorial regions. At around 30° latitude north and
south, cool dry air descends to the Earth’s surface, warming and taking up moisture as it does.
It is around this latitude where the Earth’s great deserts tend to occur. Te clockwise Atlantic
Ocean currents bring warm tropical waters to the east coasts of North and South America,
producing moist conditions in the eastern regions of these continents; the western regions
are relatively dry. Te climatic patterns produced by these various factors result in large-scale
regional ecological communities, or biomes.
5.3                                                                                                MAJOR BIOMES OF THE WORLD
Te temperature and precipitation patterns resulting from the forces discussed above in turn
produce the patterns we see in the geographical distributions of the world’s major biomes (Figs.
5.3). While biomes generally have recognizable and distinctive flora and fauna, there can be
substantial variation in these within a biome. For instance, within the desert biome we can
recognize arid and semiarid deserts, and these can vary from hot to cold deserts depending on
geographic location. Another thing to keep in mind is that more local environmental factors
can produce “biome-like” conditions on a smaller scale. For example, while boreal and even
tundra conditions are primarily found in the far northern latitudes, these conditions can also
occur at lower latitudes in high altitude mountains.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
59

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Figure 5.3: Biomes of the world. (Wikipedia ‘Plant ecology;’ Attribution: Sten Porse)
Te world’s major biomes include:
Tundra
Tundra is found primarily in the far north, above 60° latitude, but also along the Antarctic
periphery and Antarctic peninsula, and at high altitudes of the world’s great mountain ranges
such as the Himalayas, Rockies, and Andes (Fig. 5.3). Conditions are harsh throughout most
of the year in the tundra. Arctic tundra winter temperatures average below -25°C, and can dip
below -50°C. Precipitation is low, less than 30 cm annually, mostly occurring in the summer.
Te landscape is windswept; there is little vegetation tall enough to serve as windbreaks.
Tundra ground cover consists primarily of grasses and sedges, small shrubs, mosses and lichens;
few if any trees are present because of lack of available water, low temperatures, and a short
growing season. Permanently frozen soil, or permafrost, occurs from 25 cm or so and down,
also making it virtually impossible for trees to gain a foothold. Te upper soil layer undergoes
alternate freezing and thawing with the seasons, resulting in a molding of the landscape into
various patterned landforms. During the short summers, temperatures can reach above 10°C,
producing meltwater that forms ponds and lakes across the landscape (Fig. 5.4), and allowing
a short but active growing season.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
60

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                          Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Figure 5.4: Tundra in Siberia. (Wikipedia ‘Tundra;’ Attribution: Dr. Andreas Hugentobler)
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s
Brain power                                                                                 electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the
world’s wind turbines.
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air.
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity,
industries can boost performance beyond expectations.
Therefore we need the best employees who can
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering.
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
61

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Most plant biomass is in the roots, which are concentrated in the thawed upper soil layers.
Animal life of the Arctic tundra is low in diversity, but interesting and well adapted to the
harsh environmental conditions. Herbivores include large grazers such as caribou and musk
oxen, as well as Arctic hares and lemmings. Tese animals are preyed upon by wolves, Arctic
foxes, and snowy owls. Ectothermic vertebrates are absent, but some insects are found in
the tundra, providing food for large numbers of waterfowl that inhabit the marshes in
summer. Some of these insects turn the tables; the abundant water in the summer provides
breeding sites for hordes of mosquitoes, black flies and deer flies which suck blood from the
vertebrates. Terrestrial mammals are absent in the Antarctic tundra due to its isolation, but
marine mammals and birds such as seals and penguins are found along the shore. Human life
is sparse in the tundra, but some indigenous nomadic cultures survive in the Arctic tundra
by herding reindeer and fishing.
Te tundra is of intense concern ecologically because of its relationship with global warming.
Melting of the permafrost would greatly disrupt tundra ecosystems. In addition, much of the
Earth’s carbon is locked into tundra permafrost soils. Melting permafrost could release large
amounts of the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere, further
accelerating global warming and contributing to a dangerous positive feedback loop.
Taiga
Te taiga, also known as boreal forest, is found primarily across northern North America
and Eurasia, south of the tundra (Figs. 5.3, 5.5). Te taiga is the world’s largest terrestrial
biome. As is the case in the tundra, much of the taiga subsurface is permafrost. However,
in the taiga there is enough available water and a long enough growing season to support
tree growth. Tree size varies; near the tundra, trees are spaced widely apart and tree size is
stunted, resulting in an open canopy. Further south, larger more dense trees produce a closed
canopy. Characteristic vegetation of the taiga includes coniferous forests of spruce, fir, pine,
and larch. Tese trees are well adapted for the cold, snowy conditions of the taiga winters.
Teir conical crowns and drooping limbs help in shedding snow, and biochemical changes
in winter increase their resistance to freezing.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
62

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Figure 5.5: Taiga near Verkhoyansk, Russia. (Wikipedia ‘Taiga;’ Attribution: Becker0804)
Large herbivorous mammals of the taiga include caribou, moose, elk, and wood bison. Smaller
mammals of the taiga include beaver, squirrels, voles, porcupines, and hares. A variety of
mammalian predators are found in the tundra: black and brown bears, lynx, wolves, foxes,
coyotes, and a diverse group of mustelids, including various weasel species, minks, and
wolverines. Te cold temperatures of the taiga are not conducive to high reptile and amphibian
diversity, but a few species of snakes, salamanders, and frogs do live there. Several hundred
species of birds have their nesting grounds in taiga; these include seedeaters such as crossbills
and grosbeaks. Other bird species feed on insects that are abundant in the boggy areas. Raptors
such as owls and the golden eagle prey on birds and small mammals, and ravens prey on small
mammals or scavenge on animal carcasses.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
63

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Te taiga supplies much of the global demand for wood and wood products, and this intense
demand leads to unsustainable clear-cutting practices. During droughts, large wildfires can
burn many thousands of hectares of taiga forest, but most taiga tree species are fire-adapted and
regenerate well after fire if it is not too severe. Te role of periodic wildfires in taiga ecology
and the patterns of forest succession after wildfires are complex research questions. Adding to
the complexity is the role that phytophagous forest insects play in taiga ecology. Te taiga is
home to a variety of damaging forest insect pests, including the spruce budworm, mountain
pine beetle, spruce bark beetle, and larch sawfly. Tese insects can cause high tree mortality
over vast areas of forest, and their impacts appear to be magnified by climate change. Te
complex interactions among climate change, forest insects, wildfire, and demand for wood
products will play a great role in the future health of the taiga.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
64

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Temperate deciduous forest
Temperate deciduous forests, sometimes referred to as temperate seasonal forests or temperate
broadleaf forests, are found in locations with warm, moist summers and cold winters, although
winters are somewhat milder than those found in the previous two biomes. Tese forests occur
primarily in the mid-latitude regions of eastern North America and across Europe and much
of central Asia (Figs. 5.3, 5.6). Te climates of these regions include well-defined seasonality
with relatively long growing seasons. Tese forests are dominated by tree species such as
oaks, maples, and hickories that shed their leaves each fall, resulting in the appearance and
disappearance of the forest canopy seasonally. Tis allows deciduous trees to take advantage
of the long growing season, but avoid maintenance and energy loss during the winter when
conditions are not favorable for photosynthesis.
Figure 5.6: Temperate deciduous forest in northeastern Germany during leaf opening. (Wikipedia
‘Temperate deciduous forest; Attribution: Dr. Hans-Peter Ende)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
65

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Te thick canopy cover of mature temperate deciduous forests limits understory vegetation
primarily to shade-tolerant woody species and ephemeral flowering plants that take advantage
of sunlight that reaches the forest floor in the spring before the leafy canopy has developed.
Much of the world’s temperate deciduous forest is located in areas of uneven topography,
and variation in slope, elevation, and aspect can result in dramatic differences in plant species
composition. For instance, in the northern hemisphere, south-facing slopes receive more
sunlight than do north-facing slopes, meaning that south-facing slopes typically have warmer,
more xeric environmental conditions and correspondingly different soil conditions and flora
in comparison to the cooler, more mesic north-facing slopes. Soil quality varies greatly in
temperate deciduous forests, but soils in this biome are generally nutrient-rich.
Temperate deciduous forests are home to a diverse array of bird species. Many migratory birds
feed on the abundant insects there. Various species of woodpeckers take advantage of the
dead trees to feed on the insects and build their nests. Fallen trees and coarse woody debris
provide habitat for abundant insects, reptiles, and amphibians. Te southern Appalachian
region of North American contains the world’s greatest salamander diversity. Mammals
such as squirrels and other rodents are abundant in temperate deciduous forests. Small to
medium-sized predators include foxes, bobcats, and weasels, and bears are often present in
larger forested areas and forest preserves.
Much of the world’s temperate deciduous forests has been destroyed and fragmented due to
human activities. Historically, colonizing humans have harvested trees for timber, firewood,
and potash, a component of fertilizer. High grading (selective harvesting for the highest
quality timber) has often been practiced as well. Tis means the remaining trees are generally
of poor genetic quality, resulting in a gradual decrease in stand quality over time. Because
of the high quality soils, large areas of temperate deciduous forest have also been cleared for
agricultural uses. Of course, the reduction of temperate deciduous forests to small fragments
has had dramatic effects on animal life. Historically, large predators such as wolves and
cougars roamed the forests. But these animals require larger areas of habitat than most forest
fragments provide. In the absence of these predators, prey species such as deer often become
overpopulated, and their feeding activities can have adverse effects on herbaceous vegetation
and tree regeneration.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
66

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Temperate grassland
Temperate grasslands (Figs. 5.3, 5.7), also known as temperate steppes or pampas, are found
in regions with warm summers and cold winters, but with less precipitation than is found
in the temperate deciduous forest. Soils are generally deep and nutrient-rich, but there is
not enough precipitation to support much tree growth. Periodic fire plays an essential role
in maintaining many grassland environments by preventing establishment of invasive plant
species and by releasing nutrients back to the soil. Te largest areas of temperate grassland
occur in central North America, where it is referred to as “prairie,” central Eurasia (“steppes”),
and east-central Argentina, Uruguay, and southernmost Brazil (“pampas”). In North America,
precipitation declines from east to west, and the grasslands display a gradient of tallgrass prairie
in the eastern part of the grassland range, to mixed-grass prairie in the Great Plains, and then
shortgrass prairie further west, grading into the subtropical and cold deserts of the southwest
and Great Basin, in the rain shadow of the Rocky Mountains. In general, conditions in the
steppes are cold and dry, and shortgrass species predominate, whereas in the moister tropical
air of the pampas, tallgrass species are more dominant. But both regions also show variation
and gradients of vegetation based on water availability.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
67

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                        Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Figure 5.7: The Konza tallgrass prairie in the Flint Hills of northeastern Kansas, USA. A small herd of
bison is in the background. (Wikipedia ‘Grassland;’ Source unknown)
Before the arrival of Euro-Americans, the North American prairies were home to vast herds of
large grazing ungulates, namely bison and pronghorns. But in the 1800s, these numbers declined
precipitously, primarily due to overhunting. By the end of the century there were only a few
hundred bison left in the U.S. Bison are ecologically important in North American temperate
grasslands. Teir activities play a great role in shaping the prairie ecosystems. By selectively
feeding on the dominant grasses, bison increase prairie plant diversity by allowing forbs to
thrive. Bison feeding also increases photosynthesis rates by increasing light availability. Bison
increase habitat quality for prairie dogs, which in turn provide food for numerous predators.
And of course bison were of critical importance to the survival of Native American plains
cultures. Overhunting by Europeans decimated bison populations, which contributed to the
decline of the Native American plains tribes and decreased the quality of prairie ecosystems.
Subsequent destruction of these grasslands for the purpose of agriculture and other human
activities has left less than 2% of the original prairie intact. Reconstruction of grassland
ecosystems is an important and challenging focus in the field of restoration ecology.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
68

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Tropical savanna
Tropical savannas (Figs. 5.3, 5.8) are located in regions with consistently warm climates that
have highly seasonal rainfall patterns that can vary greatly from year to year. Such conditions
are found in large swaths of northern and central South America, central and southern Africa,
and much of India and Australia. Most savannas occur in locations with little topographical
relief and relatively poor soils. Typically, savannas have primarily grassy ground cover, with
scattered woody shrubs or trees such as acacias or eucalyptus, that do not form a closed canopy.
However, substantial variation exists; the abundance of woody vegetation is determined
primarily by moisture availability, which is a function of rainfall and soil characteristics.
Areas with greater amounts of available moisture tend to have more dense woody vegetation.
Savanna vegetation is well adapted to the frequent fires that occur during the dry season and
that suppress the establishment of most tree seedlings.
Figure 5.8: Acacia savanna, Taita Hills Wildlife Sanctuary, Kenya.
(Wikipedia ‘Savanna;’ Attribution: Christopher T. Cooper)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
69

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Savannas support a high abundance and diversity of herbivores. Te African savannas in
particular are known for their huge numbers and diversity of vertebrate grazers and browsers,
including zebras, giraffes, wildebeests, and many species of antelopes; some of these herbivores
migrate seasonally, following the green vegetation. Elephants play an important role through
their feeding on shrubs and trees, which promotes growth of grasses by reducing canopy
cover and competition for water and nutrients. Lions, cheetahs, hyenas, and jackals prey or
scavenge on the diverse savanna herbivore fauna. Insects are also important components of
the savanna ecosystem. Grasshoppers feed on the vegetation, dung beetles are associated with
the dung of the large herbivores, and termites build large mounds and underground galleries,
mixing and enriching the soil in the process.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
70

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Much of the world’s savanna has been dramatically altered by grazing of livestock. Overgrazing
reduces the abundance of grasses competing for water, resulting in more water for woody
vegetation and increased establishment and growth of these woody plants. Furthermore, the
amount of fuel available for fires is decreased, resulting in less frequent and cooler fires, which
also means less suppression of woody shrub and tree establishment. Tese factors are resulting
in encroachment by woody vegetation and reduction of savannas in many locations. Livestock
grazing can also reduce the savanna grass cover to the point that desertification takes place;
this is a common occurrence in locations near the Sahara desert, and may have been partially
responsible for the expansion of the Sahara over the last few thousand years.
Desert
Te major deserts (Figs. 5.3, 5.9) of the world are located where atmospheric air circulation
patterns, rain shadows, or isolation from moist ocean air results in arid conditions, typically
with less than 20 cm of precipitation per year. Much of the world’s hot tropical deserts are
located near 30° latitude north and south, known as the “horse latitudes.” It is around this
latitude where air from the Intertropical Convergence Zone descends, forming a high pressure
zone with little precipitation (Fig. 5.1). However, not all deserts are hot; deserts are defined
by lack of moisture rather than high temperatures. Cold deserts are generally found at higher
latitudes, and are the result of rain shadow effects. Te Great Basin Desert of the western
United States and the Gobi Desert of China and Mongolia are cold deserts formed by rain
shadows associated with the Sierra Nevada and Himalaya Mountains, respectively. Tese deserts
have high summer temperatures, but winter temperatures can drop to well below freezing.
Temperatures in the Gobi Desert, for instance, can range from -40°C to 50°C.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
71

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Figure 5.9: Cacti in the Baja California Desert, Mexico. (Wikipedia ‘Desert;’
Attribution: Tomas Castelazo)
As indicated above, the desert biome displays a great deal of variation, not only in temperature,
but in type and amount of vegetation and the animal life that it supports. Hot deserts, such
as the Sahara, Arabian, and Chihuahuan, contain plants with a variety of adaptations for
persisting in those extreme environments. In North America, these include such species as
creosote bush and deep-rooted plants like mesquite, with taproots that can reach the water
table. Succulents such as various species of cacti are also common; they can store water in their
stems, and have shallow but extensive root systems that quickly take up water that becomes
available during the infrequent rainfalls. Te Sahara desert of North Africa covers a vast area
of over 9 million km2. It is home to almost 3000 species of plants, including many endemics.
Prominent animals of North American hot deserts include coyotes, pronghorn, roadrunners,
rattlesnakes, kit foxes, mule deer, horned lizards, and desert tortoises. Te Sahara is home
to various species of gazelles and antelope, fennec foxes, cheetahs, monitor lizards, vipers,
and scorpions. Cold deserts are often dominated by shrubby vegetation such as sagebrush
(Artemisia sp.) and halophile (saline soil-tolerant) chenopod plants such as Atriplex sp. and
the Australian genus Maireana. Depending on geographic location, prominent animals of the
cold deserts include camels, gazelles, polecats, and plovers in Asia, and coyotes, mule deer,
pronghorn and jackrabbits in North America.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
72

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Although rugged in appearance, in reality desert ecosystems are easily damaged. Mining,
off-road vehicles and military exercises can cause serious damage to the fragile desert ground
cover. Grazing along the desert margins can cause extensive degradation as well. In many
locations, intensive irrigation has been used to convert desert ecosystems into agricultural
land. Perhaps the greatest threat to the world’s deserts is climate change. Warmer temperatures
could increase frequency and intensity of wildfires, which would have a dramatic effect on
desert plant biodiversity, and changing rainfall patterns would disrupt many desert ecosystems
as well. Conversely, some deserts, such as the Gobi and Sahara, are actually increasing in area,
as human activities such as deforestation, overgrazing, and water depletion in adjacent semi-
arid lands cause desertification.
Shrubland
Te world’s major shrublands are found in five regions that have a Mediterranean climate -
hot, dry summers and cool, moist winters. Tese five regions include the chaparral (Figs. 5.3,
5.10) of southern California and the Baja peninsula of Mexico, the central Chilean matorral,
the regions bordering the Mediterranean Sea, the cape region of South Africa (“fynbos”), and
southern and southwestern Australia (“kwongan”). Tese disparate locations are characterized
by sandy soils and shrubs and small trees with thick bark and small, evergreen leaves.
Challenge the way we run
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
RUN FASTER.
RUN LONGER..
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
RUN EASIER…
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
73

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Figure 5.10: Chaparral, Santa Ynez Mountains, near Santa Barbara in southwestern California, USA.
(Wikipedia ‘Chaparral;’ Attribution: Antandrus)
A “shrub” is difficult to define, but is generally considered to be a highly branched, often
multi-stemmed woody plant less than 8 m high. Te shrubland biome is dominated by
sclerophyllous (“hard-leaved”) shrubs; the small, leathery evergreen leaves with their thick
cuticles are well adapted for conservation of moisture during the dry summers that characterize
this biome. Some prominent plants of the shrubland biome include scrub oak and chamise in
California, king protea and pincushions in South Africa, and Kingia australis and tinsel lilies
in southern Australia. Te shrubland biome is prone to infrequent periodic fires because of
the dry summers and the profusion of dry, woody fuel. Consequently, plants of the shrubland
biome tend to be fire-adapted, resprouting or producing seeds that germinate in response to
heat from a fire. It has been estimated that the shrubland biome contains roughly 20% of the
world’s plant species, including many endemic species. Animal life in the shrubland biome
includes mule deer, jackrabbits, coyotes, pinyon mouse and western scrub jay in California,
and kangaroos, wallabies, honey possums, and southwestern pygmy possums in Australia.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
74

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Because of the large number of endemic species, shrubland environments are of great
conservation concern. Tis is especially true in Australia, where the kwongan is the country’s
only recognized global biodiversity hotspot. Treats to this environment include land clearing,
climate change, and invasive species, especially Phytophthora cinnamomi, an invasive soil-borne
water mold that causes root rot, known there as phytophthora dieback. Plants in several
genera are susceptible, and a decline in these plants could also adversely affect nectarivorous
animals, such as the honey possum and southwestern pygmy possum mentioned above, that
depend on these plants.
Tropical forest
Tropical forests are found primarily in the equatorial regions of the world, generally where annual
rainfall exceeds 200 cm and temperatures are consistently high, with annual temperature above
24°C (Figs. 5.3, 5.11). Te largest expanse of tropical forest is in the Amazon basin, but there
are also substantial areas of tropical forest in other Neotropical regions, Africa, Southeast Asia,
and the Indonesian region. As is the case with other biomes, there is substantial environmental
variation within the general tropical forest biome. Te classic rainforest (Fig. 5.11) environment
generally occurs in lowland regions, where rainfall and temperature are consistently high. But
the tropical forest biome also includes seasonal tropical forests, with a well-defined dry season
in which many plant species shed their leaves, and montane tropical forests, often referred to
as cloud forests, which occur at higher elevations with cooler climates.
Figure 5.11: Daintree Rainforest, Queensland, Australia.
(Wikipedia ‘Tropical rainforest;’ Attribution: Thomas Schoch)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
75

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                      Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Tropical forests contain the world’s greatest diversity of terrestrial organisms. Over half of
all known species of plants and animals live within the 6% of the world’s land surface that
is tropical forest, with the greatest diversity in the rainforests. One reason for this great
diversity is the characteristic vertical stratification of tropical rainforests. Well-defined ground,
understory, canopy, and emergent tree strata provide abundant ecological niches for a huge
variety of organisms. Lianas (climbing vines) and epiphytes (plants that live on the surface
of other plants) take advantage of the vertical structure provided by the dense tree growth.
Te warm, wet conditions of the tropical rainforests support high plant productivity and
high rates of decomposition. Plant litter is decomposed rapidly, releasing nutrients which
are quickly taken up by the plants. Tis explains why rainforest soils are often relatively
nutrient-poor, but can still support high primary productivity. Te diversity of plant species
and structure provide homes and resources for many species of vertebrates, as well as countless
species of insects and other invertebrates. Te montane and seasonal tropical forests contain
somewhat lower diversity, but many endemic species, and include some of the world’s most
endangered ecosystems.
This e-book
is made with
SETASIGN
SetaPDF
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
76

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Tropical forests are disappearing at an alarming rate. Traditionally, subsistence farmers have
practiced Swidden, or “slash-and-burn” agriculture, in which relatively small plots of forest are
cut down and burned. Tis clears the land for planting, but also returns some of the nutrients
to the soil in the form of ash. Te land is then farmed for a few years, but crop yields decline
over time because of nutrient depletion. Eventually, the land is abandoned and left fallow,
and the farmers move on to clear another plot of forest. Given enough time, soil nutrient
levels generally recover after abandonment, so Swidden agriculture can be a sustainable form
of agriculture at low human population levels. However, when population levels are too high,
which is the case in many tropical regions, then land use becomes too intense, fallow periods
aren’t long enough, and over time the landscape becomes degraded and unproductive.
Large scale deforestation related to logging, cattle grazing, and agriculture to meet global
demands for these products is of much greater ecological concern. Currently, a major impetus
to destruction of tropical forests in many locations is global demand for palm oil, which is
leading to massive clearing of forests for palm plantations. Loss of tropical forests is of great
concern because of the potential catastrophic loss in biodiversity; it has been estimated that
up to 50,000 species per year are doomed to extinction because of tropical deforestation. In
addition to the high biodiversity they contain, tropical forests play a critical role in carbon
sequestration, and decline of these forests will result in an increase in the greenhouse gas CO2
in the atmosphere.
Anthropogenic biomes
Te above biomes describe major vegetation types that occur across the Earth’s surface primarily
as a result of global climate patterns. Tese biomes represent patterns that we would expect in
a “natural,” undisturbed state. However, as we have noted, humans have fundamentally altered
much of the Earth’s surface. In 1700, about half of the terrestrial biosphere was unaltered by
human activities, but by 2000 only about ¼ was left unaltered. Te concept of “anthropogenic
biomes,” or “anthromes,” has been developed to reflect this reality. Anthropogenic biomes
include urban settlements, villages, croplands, rangelands, and semi-natural lands. Tis concept
allows us to view the interactive nature of human activities with the Earth’s ecological systems,
and may provide greater insight into ways that humans can exist within the natural world in
a sustainable manner.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
77

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
5.4                                                                                                PATTERNS IN THE EARTH’S BIODIVERSITY
In this section we will examine geographic and temporal patterns in the world’s biological
diversity, or “biodiversity.” But before proceeding further with a discussion of biodiversity,
it would be helpful to take a closer look at what we mean by the term “biodiversity,” and
some of the ways in which biodiversity is measured. In the broad sense, biodiversity refers to
the variety of life on Earth. Tis can include variation at many different levels ranging from
genetic to landscape or even biome-level biodiversity. Most studies of biodiversity focus on
the species level, and the most common measure of biodiversity is species richness. Species
richness is the number of species present in a given geographic area, and is probably the
simplest and most straightforward measure of biodiversity. But species richness only tells part
of the biodiversity story, for a simple count of the number of species present doesn’t take into
account how evenly represented the different species are; in other words, how close to each
other in abundance the species are. For instance, a community with 10 species in which 1
of those species contains 90% of all the individuals in the community has the same species
richness as another community with 10 species in which each species has roughly the same
number of individuals. But the second community is intuitively more diverse.
Tere are several diversity indices that incorporate both richness and evenness; one of the most
popular is the Gini-Simpson index, often just referred to as the Simpson index in ecological
work, although there are several related indices that are also referred to as “Simpson index,”
so caution should be taken. Te Gini-Simpson index produces a value ranging from 0 to 1,
which represents the probability of two randomly selected individuals from the community
being different species. Smaller values represent lower diversity and larger values higher
diversity. But again, these diversity indices are oversimplifications of reality, because they
treat all species the same, without considering the ecological roles and different evolutionary
histories of the various species.
Two other approaches to measuring diversity are trait diversity and phylogenetic diversity.
Trait diversity measures the diversity of (generally morphological) features in a community,
with the reasoning that high trait diversity reflects high diversity of ecological roles. For
example, a community with 10 bee species having a variety of different tongue lengths would
have higher trait diversity than one with 10 species having similar tongue lengths, reflecting
a greater variety of flower visitation habits (flowers with different tube lengths) among the
bees in the first community. Phylogenetic diversity takes into account the evolutionary
distances between species comprising a community; intuitively, a community of species that is
more varied phylogenetically is more diverse. For instance, a community with 10 pollinating
insect species, all of which are bees, would have less phylogenetic diversity than one with10
pollinating species that included 3 butterfly, 2 beetle, 4 bee, and 1 fly species.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
78

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
When doing a species inventory at a particular location, methodological limitations must be
taken into account. For relatively stationary species such as plants and many soil invertebrates,
sampling within well-defined plots can provide good estimates of diversity. However, for motile
animals such as most vertebrates and insects, diversity estimates are more difficult, and some
sort of trapping method is often necessary. Any trapping method will have inherent biases;
some species will be more or less likely to be collected by a given trap type. If possible, a
variety of sampling methods should be used to give a more complete picture of the species
diversity present.
Free eBook on
Learning & Development
By the Chief Learning Officer of McKinsey
Download Now
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
79

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
A related question in regard to sampling for biodiversity is: “how do we know how complete
our species inventory is?” We know how many species our sampling program collected, but
can we estimate how many species are remaining that we haven’t collected? One approach to
answering this question is to construct a species accumulation curve. Te cumulative number
of species discovered is plotted as a function of sampling effort, such as number of traps
used or person-hours spent collecting. With increasing effort and species accumulated, the
curve will increase, but at a progressively lower rate. Eventually, if the inventory is relatively
complete, the curve will approach its asymptote (meaning few or no new species are being
collected), providing an estimate of the total number of species (collected and not collected
combined) present. Other useful methods for estimating minimum species richness have been
developed by Anne Chao and colleagues; these estimates are based on the number of rare
species collected, and are described in their 2009 paper in the journal Ecology.
Te scale at which biodiversity is measured is also an important consideration. Ecologists
generally recognize three levels of diversity within a landscape; alpha, beta, and gamma diversity.
Alpha diversity is local diversity; diversity within a defined unit, such as a community or
habitat. But across a landscape, the alpha diversities of these units will probably vary to some
extent. Te extent of the variation in the alpha diversities is known as beta diversity. Gamma
diversity represents the overall diversity of the entire landscape. In biodiversity studies, it is
of critical importance to be aware of the scale at which diversity is being measured.
It is also important to remember that biodiversity can and does change over time, often in a
predictable manner, such as in the successional change from field to forest. Tere is evidence
that frequency of disturbance affects diversity. Te intermediate disturbance hypothesis
suggests that, in many communities, intermediate frequencies of disturbance actually maximize
biodiversity by allowing some colonization to persist in the community. Very frequent
disturbances restrict biodiversity to early colonizing species at the expense of later successional
species, but very infrequent disturbance allows later successional species to outcompete earlier
successional species, reducing diversity.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
80

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
Conservation of the Earth’s biodiversity is of paramount importance. To assess the rate and
causes of biodiversity loss, we need to know how much biodiversity there is, and how it is
distributed, not only geographically, but taxonomically. Te unfortunate fact is that we still
have relatively little detailed knowledge of much of this biodiversity, but broad patterns are
apparent. To begin with, most of the world’s biodiversity is represented by the smaller organisms.
To cite one example, one order of insects, Coleoptera (the beetles), contains over 300,000
known species. Tis is more than six times the number of all known vertebrate species. But
even this number falls well short of the number of predicted species, and estimates ranging
up to 80 million have been proposed for the Arthropoda, the animal phylum that includes
the insects. Among the eukaryotes, most of the world’s vertebrates and vascular plants have
probably been cataloged. But groups such as the insects and other arthropods, nematodes,
protozoa, algae, and fungi have undoubtedly had only a small proportion of their diversity
cataloged, and there is even more to be learned regarding prokaryote diversity.
Te Earth’s biodiversity is the result of evolutionary processes that have been at work for some
3.5 billion years. For most of that period, life was restricted to prokaryotes and single-celled
eukaryotes. Te Cambrian explosion, during which almost all phyla of multicellular organisms
appeared, marked the beginning of the Phanerozoic Eon 540 million years ago. Since then,
the history of the Earth’s biodiversity has been punctuated by five mass extinctions as well
as several smaller ones, as shown in the graph of marine fossil diversity in Fig. 5.12. Te last
200 million years have seen a consistent increase in biodiversity in the fossil record; there is
debate among paleontologists as to whether this is an artifact of a more complete and better
preserved recent fossil record compared to that of earlier strata, or if it represents an accurate
picture of temporal changes in biodiversity.
Figure 5.12: Apparent marine fossil diversity during the Phanerozoic Eon. Note that the time
line (x-axis) moves from most recent (left) to less recent (right). (Wikipedia ‘Biodiversity;’
Attribution: Dragons flight)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
81

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
With regard to current biodiversity, a striking spatial pattern emerges, which we have already
noted - the high biodiversity of the equatorial regions, in particular the rainforests. Tere
is a general trend of increasing biodiversity from the higher latitudes to the equator. Tere
has been much debate among biogeographers regarding the causes of this pattern, and many
hypotheses have been proposed. Some biogeographers have suggested that the greater rates of
photosynthesis and primary production at lower latitudes support higher population levels and
thus decreased extinction rates. Another leading hypothesis revolves around rates of evolution
and time since large-scale environmental perturbation. Based on this latter view, lower latitudes
would be expected to have greater biodiversity because (1) the warmer climate leads to faster
mutation rates and rates of evolution, and (2) the equatorial regions largely escaped the dramatic
reduction in biodiversity suffered by higher latitudes during glaciation; therefore, populations
in the lower latitudes have had longer to evolve, or conversely, populations in higher latitudes
haven’t had enough time to “catch-up.” Tere are other hypotheses as well, and explaining the
latitudinal gradient in species diversity is still an important focus in biogeography.
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent
the wheel we reinvent
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new
markets provide both opportunities and challenges.
An environment in which your expertise is in high
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere
within our global group and benefit from international
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing
light every day.
Light is OSRAM
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
82

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
To identify regions of great biodiversity importance and to prioritize conservation efforts,
global                                                                                                “biodiversity hotspots” have been identified. Te concept was first developed by
conservation biologist Norman Myers, who identified 25 areas (shown in green in Fig. 5.13)
around the world that met two criteria. A biodiversity hotspot (1) must have at least 0.5%
or 1,500 of its species of vascular plants considered endemics, and (2) must have lost at least
70% of its vegetation. Since Myers work, 9 more locations have been added (shown in blue
in Fig. 5.13). Relatively little of the total area within these biodiversity hotspots is protected,
and recognition of these areas as important in biodiversity conservation has led to increased
efforts to protect them. On the other hand, the concept of biodiversity hotspots has received
criticism for several perceived shortcomings, including lack of attention to other (non-vascular
plant) taxa, too much emphasis on past, rather than present, habitat loss, and too much focus
on species richness rather than other, possibly more meaningful measures of diversity.
Figure 5.13: Biodiversity hotspots. Original regions in green, added regions in blue.
(Wikipedia ‘Biodiversity hotspot;’ Attribution: World_map_blank_without_borders.svg)
One of the most fascinating and important areas of biogeography has involved efforts to explain
patterns of biodiversity and the causes of these patterns. Te field of island biogeography has
been at the forefront of these efforts, and has made important theoretical contributions as
well as laying the groundwork for applications in conservation biology. We will consider the
biogeography of islands and oceans in the next chapter.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
83

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Ecology, Biomes, and Biodiversity
5.5                                                                                                   REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Chao, A, Colwell, RK, Lin, C-W & Gotelli, NJ 2009, ‘Sufficient sampling for asymptotic
minimum species richness estimators’, Ecology, vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 1125-1133.
Cox, CB & Moore, PD 2010, Biogeography: an ecological and evolutionary approach, 8th edn.
John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Ellis, EC, Goldewijk, KK, Siebert, S, Lightman, D & Ramankutty, N 2010, ‘Anthropogenic
transformation of the biomes, 1700 to 2000’, Global Ecology and Biogeography, vol. 19,
pp. 589-606.
Lomolino, MV, Riddle, BR, Whittaker, RJ & Brown, JH 2010, Biogeography, 4th edn. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts.
Magurran, AE 2003, Measuring biological diversity. Blackwell Science, Malden, Massachusetts.
Magurran, AE & McGill, BJ 2011, Biological diversity: frontiers in measurement and assessment.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Mittermeier, RA, Mittermeier, CG & Myers, N 2005, Hotspots: Earth’s biologically richest
and most endangered terrestrial ecoregions. Graphic Arts Center Publishing, Portland, Oregon.
Myers, N, Mittermeier, RA, Mittermeier, CG, da Fonseca, GAB & Kent, J 2000, Biodiversity
hotspots for conservation priorities, Nature, vol. 403, pp. 853-858.
Smith, TM & Smith, RL 2014, Elements of ecology, 9th ed. Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco.
Wikipedia 2015, ‘Trade winds,’ ‘Ocean current,’ ‘Biome,’ ‘Plant ecology,’ ‘Tundra,’ ‘Taiga,’
‘Temperate deciduous forest,’ ‘Grassland,’ ‘Savanna,’ ‘Desert,’ ‘Chaparral,’ ‘Tropical rainforest,’
‘Biodiversity,’ ‘Biodiversity hotspot,’ https://en.wikipedia.org/
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
84

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                        Islands and Oceans
6   ISLANDS AND OCEANS
Your goals for this chapter are to learn about:
• How islands form
• Hazards and advantages of island life
• Te “island rule”
• Factors affecting species richness on islands
• Differences between marine and terrestrial environments and organisms
• Marine biogeographic realms and pelagic zones
• Ocean trenches, ridges, and hydrothermal vents
• Coral reefs
360°
thinking.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers                             © Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
85

                                                                                                       BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION   Islands and Oceans
6.1                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
Island life has always fascinated biogeographers. Many islands are isolated from potential sources
of immigrants, meaning that the biota of islands follow their own evolutionary pathways that
often diverge dramatically from mainland relatives. We see this pattern in the unique flora
and fauna of the island continent of Australia, as well as South America until formation of
the Panama land bridge. Evolutionary patterns are often magnified on islands, and island
biogeography has played a central role in the development of evolutionary theory. Charles
Darwin was an island biogeographer; Galápagos (Fig. 6.1) island life provided impetus for
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection. Te same was true of Alfred Russel Wallace
and his work on the Indonesian islands. Islands continue to provide excellent opportunities
for natural experimental studies, since they are often relatively simple ecosystems with well-
defined boundaries. In this chapter, we will examine patterns of diversity on islands.
Figure 6.1: A satellite image of the Galápagos Islands (overlaid with names of major islands), about
900 km west of continental Ecuador. (Wikipedia ‘Galápagos Islands;’ Attribution: U.S. National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
86

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                                                      Islands and Oceans
6.2                                                                                                 ISLAND FORMATION
Tere are several different types of oceanic islands, based on the processes that lead to their
formation. Continental islands are part of the continental shelf, but are separated from the
mainland by water, or have become separated from the mainland by seafloor spreading. Te
Indonesian Islands of Borneo, Sumatra, and Java are continental islands, as is New Zealand.
Another type of island is the volcanic island arc, in which the movement of one subduction
plate under another produces geological uplift that result in island formation. Te Aleutian
Islands, extending from the Alaska Peninsula to the Kamchatka Peninsula of Russia, exemplify
this island type. A third island type forms as the result of volcanic hotspots, which are thought
to be hot mantle plumes that form volcanoes. Generally, these are chains of islands that form
sequentially as the oceanic tectonic plate moves over the hotspot. As the recently formed
island moves away from the hotspot, another is formed from the seafloor that now lies over
the hotspot; over millions of years, an island chain forms, with the youngest (volcanic) one
at the hotspot and the oldest one at the opposite end of the chain, and perhaps submerged.
Te Hawaiian Islands and the Galápagos Islands formed via this process.
6.3                                                                                                 GETTING THERE AND SURVIVING THERE
Seawater is not a friendly environment for most terrestrial organisms, so most organisms
that colonize oceanic islands must disperse across the ocean barrier rather than surviving
in it. Animals that are strong fliers, such as large birds and bats, can reach isolated islands
under their own power, and some insects and smaller flying vertebrates may be aided by
strong winds. Occasionally, small nonflying animals that otherwise could not disperse to a
distant island may arrive there via transport via masses of floating debris. Some plants have
floating seeds or fruits that can be carried by ocean currents to isolated islands; the coconut
palm is an example. Other plants have very light or winged seeds that can be borne by the
wind, and of course some have seeds with hooks or adhesive substances that allow them to
hitch a ride on animals. As you might expect, islands, and particularly isolated islands, tend
to have biotas that are largely composed of descendants of good dispersers. Nevertheless,
long-distance dispersal by terrestrial vertebrates has been documented, including distances
of hundreds of miles by various reptiles, amphibians, and mammals. Even elephants can
swim up to 48 km based on estimates. Once there, species with broad feeding niches seem
to be at an advantage, which makes sense; food might be scarce, and a specialist feeder could
have difficulty finding its required food. In general, herbivorous colonizers fare better than
carnivores, and smaller animals, which require fewer resources, are more successful than large
ones. Asexual reproduction and self-fertilization capabilities are also advantageous, for obvious
reasons, in a newly colonized location.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
87

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Islands and Oceans
Organisms that inhabit islands face a variety of hazards. Island populations are generally
smaller than those on large landmasses. Small population size means an increased likelihood
of extinction. For instance, while islands account for only 20% of bird species and subspecies,
90% of bird extinctions since 1600 have been island birds. Small populations also mean low
genetic diversity, making island populations less capable of evolving resistance to introduced
pathogens, and on small islands there may be no refugia to allow escape from introduced
natural enemies. Island animals are often slow-moving and “naïve” with regard to introduced
predators, and many island bird and insect species are flightless, which often makes them
virtually defenseless against these introduced marauders. Tese island species are often at a
competitive disadvantage as well. Exacerbating the above dangers is the fact that islands are
often ecologically and climatically unstable. However, there are advantages for those species
that successfully colonize islands. Island colonizers often leave behind their mainland predators
and pathogens, and have fewer natural enemies in their new island home. Ecological niches
with little competition may be available. Te availability of new ecological niches on islands
has led to many examples of dramatic adaptive radiations, such as Darwin’s famous Galápagos
finches, and the honeycreepers of Hawaii (Fig. 6.2). Te latter birds are descended from an
ancestral finch-like colonizer, and their adaptive radiation has produced 11 endemic genera and
many species, with beaks that reflect adaptations to a variety of feeding niches (Fig. 6.2, right).
We will turn your CV into
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
Send us your CV on
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
www.employerforlife.com
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
88

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Islands and Oceans
Figure 6.2: The scarlet Hawaiian honeycreeper Drepanis coccinea (left), and beak and tongue
variation in Hawaiian honeycreepers (right). (Wikipedia ‘Hawaiian honeycreeper;’ Attributions:
U.S. Geological Survey and John Gerrard Keulemans, respectively)
On islands, small organisms tend to exhibit gigantism and large organisms tend to exhibit
dwarfism, a trend known as the “island rule” or Foster’s rule, after J.B. Foster. In a 1964 paper,
Foster suggested that this pattern can be explained by decreased predation pressure (due to
absence of predators that are present on the mainland), which allows small animals to evolve
larger body sizes, and reduced food resources, which provides selective pressure for smaller
body size in large animals. But more recent research suggests that this is an oversimplified
explanation of more complex causation.
Tere are many examples, both extant and extinct, of the island rule, from a variety of taxa.
Tese include giant (30+ cm and 1 kg) shrew relatives in the genus Solenodon (Fig. 6.3,
left) on the Caribbean islands, and the elephant birds and moas of Madagascar and New
Zealand, respectively. Te extinct dodos of the island of Mauritius were close relatives of
pigeons. Gigantism in the insect world includes the giant wetas of New Zealand, relatives
of grasshoppers and katydids. Island plants often exhibit gigantism and “insular woodiness;”
mainland relatives are herbaceous, but the island species are woody. Te cactus tree of the
Galápagos and some silverswords of the Hawaiian Islands are examples. On the other hand,
the extinct Channel Island, or pygmy, mammoth (Fig. 6.3, right) was only about as tall at
the shoulders as an adult human, with less than one-sixth the weight of its full-sized ancestor
on mainland North America. Te Bali tiger, an extinct tiger subspecies, weighed no more
than 100 kg, less than half the size of mainland tiger subspecies. Tere are several examples
of dwarf island dinosaur fossils as well. Finally, evidence of island dwarfism in humans is
found in Homo floresiensis, an extinct species of hominin descended from Homo erectus on
the island of Flores in Indonesia.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
89

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Islands and Oceans
Figure 6.3: Examples of insular gigantism and dwarfism: The shrew-like Solenodon paradoxus (left)
and a skeleton of the Channel Island or pygmy mammoth, Mammuthus exilis (right). (Wikipedia
‘Hispaniolan solenodon’ and ‘Pygmy mammoth;’ Attributions: Seb az86556 and Franko Fonseca,
respectively)
6.4                                                                                                    PATTERNS OF SPECIES RICHNESS ON ISLANDS
A major focus of island biogeography has been to unravel the factors that determine species
richness on islands. Tere is a well-known relationship between island area and species richness;
in general, larger islands have greater species richness than do smaller islands. But island area
alone does not give a complete picture of insular species richness. Compared to less remote
islands, very isolated islands have lower diversity than one would predict based only on their
areas. Te 19th century botanist Joseph Hooker noted the latter pattern with regard to plant
diversity on islands, and since then this pattern has been verified for various animal taxa as well.
In 1967, ecologists Robert MacArthur and E.O. Wilson published their influential book, Te
Teory of Island Biogeography, in which they proposed that island species richness is determined
by rates of species immigration and extinction. Tey reasoned that, as species richness (S ) on
an island increases, immigration of new species (I ) decreases because it becomes more likely
that any newly-arriving individuals belong to a species that is already present on the island.
Te extinction rate (E ), on the other hand, will increase with S because more species means
smaller population sizes for each species, increasing the risk of extinction. Immigration and
extinction result in continual turnover in the species composition of an island, but the balance
of these two factors results in a dynamic equilibrium level of species richness, S* (Fig. 6.4).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
90

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                       Islands and Oceans
Figure 6.4: According to MacArthur and Wilson’s equilibrium theory of island biogeography,
species richness (S*) on an island is a result of immigration rate (I ) equaling extinction rate (E ).
(Attribution: Shawn Meagher, Western Illinois University)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
91

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                            Islands and Oceans
MacArthur and Wilson then included the effects of island isolation and size on immigration and
extinction rates. Tey reasoned that immigration is affected primarily by distance of an island
from a mainland source of immigrants, and extinction is determined primarily by island area.
Islands that are close to a source of colonizers are more likely to receive immigrants because
these islands represent a “closer target;” larger islands are less likely to have extinctions because
they have more resources and environmental stability than do smaller islands. Tis means that
greater species richness will be found on larger islands near the mainland and less richness on
smaller islands far from the mainland (Fig. 6.5). Tus, MacArthur and Wilson’s theory tied
together island area and degree of isolation into a predictive model of island species richness.
Figure 6.5: As shown by the figure on the left, larger islands will have lower extinction rates (E ), and
therefore greater equilibrium species richness (S*), than will smaller islands. In the figure on the right,
we see that islands near a mainland source of colonizers will have greater immigration rates (I ) and
greater equilibrium species richness than will more isolated islands. (Attribution: Shawn Meagher,
Western Illinois University)
Te theory of island biogeography has had a huge impact on biogeography and ecology, as
witnessed by the new research it has generated and the many thousands of citations the book
has received. Te theory has been criticized for treating individual species as identical units,
without taking into account differences in life histories, resource requirements, physiological
constraints, and so forth. But like any scientific theory, the theory of island biogeography
attempts to reveal general principles at the expense of such complex details that might mask
patterns. Tests of the theory have been inconclusive, with some studies supporting the theory
and others not. In general, the relationships between island size and isolation and species
richness have been supported for a variety of taxa. Some studies of bird richness on islands
have suggested that substantial species turnover and dynamic equilibrium does occur over
time, but these studies may have been affected by anthropogenic changes on the islands. Some
have expressed doubt that an island ever reaches equilibrium species richness because of the
frequency of disturbances.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
92

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Islands and Oceans
Of major importance is the fact that applications of the theory of island biogeography are not
restricted to oceanic islands alone, but have great ramifications for insular terrestrial habitats
as well. We will discuss this more fully in chapter 8.
6.5                                                                                                   THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT
Te field of marine biogeography has progressed much more slowly than has its terrestrial
counterpart. Tis is understandable; for humans, the marine environment is much less hospitable
and accessible than most terrestrial environments. We are not adapted to breathing in water,
and so must have specialized equipment in order to remain under water for very long. Te
tremendous physical pressure in the deep oceans has made those environments inaccessible
until the relatively recent development of underwater vessels capable of withstanding such
pressures. Te last few decades have seen rapid and exciting developments in the field of
marine biogeography.
Tere are several differences between marine and terrestrial environments that must be taken
into account to fully understand the biogeography of marine organisms, apart from the obvious
one that water is wet and air is dry J. One significant difference is the great importance of
the vertical dimension in the oceans. On land, there is a vertical dimension associated with
plant structure, flying animals, and other airborne organisms. But on land, “what goes up
must come down,” and the horizontal dimension associated with the land surface, plant
cover, and so forth, dominates. In the marine environment, the buoyancy provided by water
makes it about as easy for many organisms to move and maintain their positions vertically as
horizontally. Furthermore, as we shall see, the physical properties of water create fairly distinct
vertical stratification that affects the distributions of marine organisms. Another important
characteristic of the oceans is that there are fewer physical barriers to dispersal; compared to
land, the marine environment is more continuous.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
93

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Islands and Oceans
In general, marine organisms are much less familiar to us than are terrestrial organisms, mostly
because the marine environment is less accessible to us than the terrestrial environment. Te
physical properties of the marine environment also provide selective pressures for traits that
often seem bizarre from our perspective. Gas exchange structures are a case in point. Because
aquatic organisms are surrounded by water, desiccation is of little concern. Te body wall is
generally very thin, and gas exchange often occurs directly across this surface. Even specialized
gas exchange structures of marine animals are simply vascularized, thin-walled extensions of
the body wall. Tese structures are usually external and in direct contact with the surrounding
fluid. But terrestrial animals have a problem - the ever-present danger of desiccation in the
relatively dry surrounding air. Terefore, selective pressures have favored the evolution of
internal respiratory structures that are protected from the surrounding dry air. Likewise,
reproduction in marine environments generally involves external fertilization, with gametes
released directly into the water. In terrestrial environments, desiccation of gametes is a danger
in open air, so internal fertilization is the norm. Also, marine animals generally eliminate
metabolic wastes as ammonia. Ammonia is toxic; even low concentrations in the body are
toxic to most animals. But marine animals can constantly eliminate ammonia because water
for dilution is plentiful. Many marine animals can excrete ammonia right across the body
surface. However, because desiccation is such a concern in the terrestrial environment, land
animals cannot afford to expend large amounts of water diluting ammonia. Terrestrial animals
generally eliminate ammonia as uric acid or urea, which require less water. Tey also require
more complex excretory systems than do marine animals.
Other differences between marine and terrestrial animals relate to the greater density of water
compared to air. Tis means that marine animals require less rigid skeletons, because water
provides much of the support against the force of gravity. Te density of water also makes
possible the free-floating existence of planktonic marine organisms, as well as the suspension-
feeding stationary, or sessile, animals, such as sponges and sea anemones, that feed on these
abundant planktonic organisms. On land, air just doesn’t contain enough of these planktonic
organisms to support such suspension-feeding strategies, although orb-weaving spiders could
be considered a notable exception.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
94

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                                                    Islands and Oceans
6.6                                                                                             STRUCTURE OF THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT
As mentioned previously, the vertical component of the marine environment is a critical
factor in the distribution of marine organisms, as is proximity to the landmasses. Two basic
biogeographical realms of the oceans can be recognized - the neritic realm, which consists of
shallow seas associated with continental shelves, and the pelagic, or open ocean, realm. Te
ocean floor has much different ecological communities than those existing up in the water
column. Organisms associated with the ocean floor are referred to as benthic, whereas those
that live up in the water column are known as pelagic. Pelagic organisms can be nektonic
(active swimmers) or planktonic (drifting organisms). In general, planktonic organisms
are tiny or even microscopic, whereas nektonic organisms mostly include vertebrates and
large invertebrates.
AXA Global
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
95

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                             Islands and Oceans
Te ocean floor varies tremendously in depth. Te continental shelf region, which is basically
a submerged extension of the continents, slopes down to about 200 m in depth. At the shelf
break, the rate of descent increases dramatically along the continental slope until reaching
the abyssal plain, which ranges from about 4,000 to 6,000 m depth. But there are regions
of the ocean floor that are even deeper. Te deep ocean trenches are subduction zones where
old ocean floor disappears into the Earth. Tese trenches can be over 10,000 m in depth
(Fig. 6.6). Te deepest of these, the Mariana Trench of the western Pacific Ocean, reaches
depths of about 11,000 m.
Figure 6.6: Layers of the pelagic realm.
(Wikipedia ‘Pelagic zone;’ Attribution: DieBuche,
Finlay McWalter, & TomCatX)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
96

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Islands and Oceans
Environmental conditions vary depending on depth and proximity to landmasses, and
abundance and diversity of benthic and pelagic organisms vary with these conditions as well.
Light penetrates the ocean waters to only a limited extent. In the neritic realm, the waters
are well-lit, and high photosynthetic rates occur here. Oxygen is generally abundant, and,
except for the intertidal zone, conditions are relatively stable. Te photosynthetic organisms,
as well as nutrients originating from the continents, provide abundant sources of nutrients
and energy for the marine life there. Compared to the pelagic realm, the neritic realm has
greater abundance and diversity of life per unit volume. Te irregular shapes of the continents
can form isolated communities along the coastlines, and neritic communities of different
landmasses are also isolated from each other, resulting in greater chances of genetic isolation
and speciation among neritic communities than in the pelagic realm. For example, the neritic
faunas of islands often exhibit a high degree of endemism, as does the Red Sea, a semi-isolated
inlet of the Indian Ocean which is connected to the Ocean via the narrow Bab el Mandeb
strait and the Gulf of Aden. Because of the high evaporation rate and little input of fresh
water, the Red Sea is highly saline, providing a unique environment for it biota. Te Red Sea
fauna exhibits a high degree of endemism - about 17% of Red Sea fish species and 50% of
cephalopod species are found nowhere else.
e Graduate Programme
I joined MITAS because
for Engineers and Geoscientists
I wanted real responsibili                                                                        www.discovermitas.com
Month 16
a construction                                                                                    I was
supervisor in
the North Sea
advising and
                                                                                                  Real work               helping foremen
International                                                                                     opportunities
ree work placements                                                                                                       solve problems
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
97

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                      Islands and Oceans
Within the pelagic realm (Fig. 6.6), the ocean layer in which enough light is available
for photosynthesis is known as the epipelagic zone. Because this is the zone in which
photosynthesis can take place, it contains the highest concentration of marine life in the pelagic
realm. Photosynthetic phytoplankton are abundant in this zone, as well as the zooplankton
that feed on them. Tese tiny organisms serve as the base of food chains that include larger
invertebrates such as jellyfish as well as a diversity of fish species. Te depth of this zone varies,
but generally reaches around 200 m. Below this is a zone of twilight conditions, where little
light penetrates - the mesopelagic zone (Fig. 6.6). Within the mesopelagic zone, there is
insufficient light for photosynthesis to occur. Tis zone extends down to roughly 1,000 m
depth, and is associated with a region of rapid water density change called the pycnocline.
Within the pycnocline, water temperatures decrease dramatically with depth. Since cold water
is denser than warm water, this rapid decrease in water temperature results in a change in
water density from lower density warm waters to higher density cold waters. Te pycnocline
acts as a barrier, inhibiting vertical water circulation and affecting the vertical movement and
distribution of chemicals and marine animals. Animals that frequent the mesopelagic zone
include detritivores that feed on dead organisms and wastes descending from the epipelagic
zone, and predators that in turn feed on these detritivores. Tese mesopelagic animals include
various species of squid and cuttlefish, as well as fishes such as lancetfish, daggertooths, and
lanternfish. Mesopelagic fish often have large eyes and binocular vision, particularly visual
predators that must detect prey in the low light conditions. Many mesopelagic fish undertake
vertical migrations, moving up to the epipelagic zone at night to feed on zooplankton and
then back to the mesopelagic zone, where there is more safety from predators, during the day.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
98

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Islands and Oceans
Below the mesopelagic zone lies a realm of almost total darkness. Te bathypelagic zone
(Fig. 6.6) extends down to about 6,000 m. No photosynthesis takes place here, and, per
unit volume, there is much less abundance and diversity of organisms than is found in the
epipelagic zone. Bathypelagic food chains are supported by the relatively small amounts of
detritus, or “marine snow,” that make it down to this zone. Waters are cold; temperatures
average about 4°C, with little variation. Te characteristics of species inhabiting this zone
reflect the selective pressures applied by these conditions. Metabolic rates and activity levels of
animals in the bathypelagic zone are generally low, an adaptation for energy efficiency in an
environment where food is not very abundant, and temperatures and dissolved oxygen levels
are low. Te skeleton (if present) and muscle tissues of bathypelagic animals are generally weak
with high water content, which allows these animals to survive in the crushing water pressures
at these depths. Fishes that inhabit the mesopelagic zone depend primarily on detection of
sound and water pressure changes to sense their environment, and chemical detection can be
important in locating mates or prey. Most animals in this zone have poorly developed vision,
or no eyes at all. However, some can detect light, and some predators take advantage of this
by employing bioluminescence to attract prey. Some anglerfish (Order Lophiiformes) have a
bioluminescent lure that serves this function (Fig. 6.7). When the prey approaches close to
the lure, the anglerfish eats it whole with its huge, tooth-filled jaws. Despite their ferocious
appearance, most anglerfish are only a few centimeters long, with the male usually much smaller
than the female. In some species, such as the humpback anglerfish, Melanocetus johnsonii
(Fig. 6.7), mating occurs via the tiny male (barely 3 cm long) attaching to the body wall of
the much larger female (about 18 cm long). Te male becomes a symbiont of the female,
deriving nutrition from her and basically becoming a sperm provider. In general, there are
relatively few fishes inhabiting the bathypelagic zone. Tis zone is dominated by various species
of whales and invertebrates such as cephalopods, brachiopods, sponges, and echinoderms.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
99

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                               Islands and Oceans
Figure 6.7: Humpback anglerfish, Melanocetus johnsonii.
(Wikipedia ‘Humpback anglerfish;’ Attribution: August Brauer, 1906)
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
Length: 1O MONTHS
THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
PROFESSIONAL GOALS
Format: FULL-TIME
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
EXPERIENCE
#10 WORLDWIDE                                                                    55 Nationalities
5 Specializations
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
Personalize your program                                                         in class
FINANCIAL TIMES
www.ie.edu/master-management                                                     mim.admissions@ie.edu   Follow us on IE MIM Experience
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
100

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Islands and Oceans
Believe it or not, there are even more extreme ocean depths. Te hadopelagic zone (Fig. 6.6)
is found in the deep ocean trenches, at depths down to 11,000 m. Conditions at these depths
are generally similar to those of the bathypelagic zone, only more extreme in terms of pressure
and low nutrient levels, which again are dependent on the relatively little “marine snow” that
filters down from above. At these depths, animal life is poorly known, and invertebrates such
as annelid tube worms, jellyfish, and sea anemones dominate. A high proportion of species in
the hadopelagic zone are endemics that are confined to isolated locations along the trenches.
At the other end of the “ocean floor conveyor belt” are the mid-ocean ridges. Tese ridges are
underwater mountain systems with a valley or rift along the spine that functions as a spreading
center where new seafloor is being produced. Mid-ocean ridges are volcanically active, and
at some locations along the rift, fissures in the rock allow cold water to penetrate. When the
water contacts the upwelling magma, water temperatures may exceed 400°C. Tese locations
where geothermally heated water exits are known as hydrothermal vents (Fig. 6.8). Previously
we pointed out that photosynthesis doesn’t occur below the epipelagic zone because of lack
of sunlight. But these hydrothermal vents are home to unique ecological communities that
are far more diverse than could be supported by the sparse marine rain they receive. How
do these communities persist without a base of photosynthesizing organisms? Te dissolved
minerals contained in the water support chemosynthetic bacteria. Tese amazing bacteria are
the primary producers of the vent community. Rather than using light to produce energy,
these organisms use chemicals, such as hydrogen sulfide produced by the hydrothermal vents,
to produce energy, and are fed upon by invertebrates such as copepods and amphipods. In
turn, these tiny invertebrates support food chains of larger animals, resulting in vibrant ocean
floor communities that include tubeworms, snails, crabs, a variety of other invertebrates, and
various fish species.
Figure 6.8: Diagram of hydrothermal vent biogeochemical cycle. (Wikipedia ‘Hydrothermal
vent;’ Attribution: U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
101

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Islands and Oceans
Te biological diversity of hydrothermal vent communities is impressive, but pales in
comparison to that of the “rainforests of the oceans,” the coral reefs (Fig. 6.9). As the name
would suggest, coral reefs are formed by reef-building stony corals, tiny, colonial members of
the Phylum Cnidaria, which also includes jellyfish and sea anemones. Tese corals secrete a
calcium carbonate skeleton that forms a hard outer shell covering the colony. It is this skeleton,
along with other organisms such as coralline algae and shelled molluscs, that provides the reef
structure. Coral reefs are widespread, but are most abundant in shallow, clear tropical waters.
Te greatest concentration of coral reefs is in the Australian/Indonesian region, with the
Indian Ocean and the Caribbean Sea also containing substantial reefs (Fig. 6.10). Coral reefs
comprise less than 0.1% of the total ocean surface, but contain over 25% of marine species.
Figure 6.9: A blue starfish (Linckia laevigata) resting on hard acropora coral. Lighthouse,
Ribbon Reefs, Great Barrier Reef. (Wikipedia ‘Great Barrier Reef;’ Attribution: Copyright
(c) 2004 Richard Ling; www.rling.com)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
102

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                       Islands and Oceans
Figure 6.10: Locations of coral reefs. (Wikipedia ‘Coral reef;’ Attribution: U.S. National Aeronautics
and Space Administration)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
103

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Islands and Oceans
Paradoxically, coral reefs thrive in nutrient-poor waters. Corals can absorb some nutrients
directly from the water, and they also catch zooplankton with their tentacles. But endosymbiotic
dinoflagellates, mostly in the genus Symbiodinium, are a major source of energy for the corals.
Tese single-celled, photosynthetic protists reside in the tissues of tropical corals, and provide
a significant amount of energy to the corals. Te corals, in return, provide their endosymbiotic
mutualists with nutrients, CO2, and an advantageous location for receiving sunshine. Tese
endosymbionts are sensitive to environmental conditions, and changes in water chemistry,
temperature, salinity, and other factors can trigger the loss of these zooxanthellae, a process
known as “coral bleaching.” Te corals can sometimes be recolonized by zooxanthellae if
conditions improve, but long-term or repeated bleaching can result in death of the corals. Because
coral reefs provide so much of our marine biodiversity, coral bleaching is a serious problem
associated with pollution, other anthropogenic changes in water quality, and climate change.
In the last couple of chapters, we have focused primarily on biogeographic patterns from an
ecological perspective. In the next chapter, we will consider longer term historical factors that
have played important roles in shaping the distribution of Earth’s biodiversity.
6.7                                                                                                  REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Brown, JH 1978, ‘Te theory of insular biogeography and the distribution of boreal birds
and mammals’, Great Basin Naturalist Memoirs, no. 2, pp. 209-227.
Cox, CB & Moore, PD 2010, Biogeography: an ecological and evolutionary approach, 8th edn.
John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Lomolino, MV, Riddle, BR, Whittaker, RJ & Brown, JH 2010, Biogeography, 4th edn. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts.
Longhurst, AR 2007, Ecological geography of the sea, 2nd ed. Academic Press, Amsterdam.
MacArthur, RH & Wilson, EO 1967, Te theory of island biogeography. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
McCarthy, D 2009, Here be dragons: how the study of animal and plant distributions revolutionized
our views of life and Earth. Oxford University Press, New York.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
104

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                              Islands and Oceans
Ormond, RFG, Gage, JD &Angel, MV, eds. 1997, Marine biodiversity: patterns and processes.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.
Pechenik, J 2014, Biology of the invertebrates, 7th ed. McGraw-Hill Education, New York.
Quammen, D 1996, Te song of the dodo: island biogeography in an age of extinctions. Scribner,
New York.
Wikipedia 2015, ‘Galápagos Islands,’ ‘Hawaiian Honeycreeper,’ ‘Hispaniolan solenodon,’
‘Pygmy mammoth,’ ‘Insular biogeography,’ ‘Pelagic zone,’ ‘Humpback anglerfish,’ ‘Hydrothermal
vent,’ ‘Great Barrier Reef,’ ‘Coral reef,’ https://en.wikipedia.org/
In the past 5 years we have drilled around
95,000 km
—that’s more than twice around the world.
Who are we?
We are the world’s leading provider of reservoir characterization,
drilling, production, and processing technologies to the oil and
gas industry.
Who are we looking for?
We offer countless opportunities in the following domains:
n Operations
n Research, Engineering, and Manufacturing
n Geoscience and Petrotechnical
n Commercial and Business
We’re looking for high-energy, self-motivated graduates
with vision and integrity to join our team.                                                     What will you be?
careers.slb.com
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
105

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Historical Biogeography
7   HISTORICAL BIOGEOGRAPHY
Your goals for this chapter are to learn about:
• Early life on Earth
• Te Cambrian Explosion
• Major tectonic, climatic, and biogeographical patterns of the Paleozoic Era
• Major tectonic, climatic, and biogeographical patterns of the Mesozoic Era
• Major tectonic, climatic, and biogeographical patterns of the Cenozoic Era
• Te Great American Interchange
• Milanković cycles
7.1                                                                                               INTRODUCTION
Te patterns of biodiversity that we see today are, to a great extent, the result of historical
events that have occurred over hundreds of millions and even billions of years. In this chapter
we will take a broad overview of the four billion year history of life on Earth, and connect
these historical events with present-day biogeographical patterns.
7.2                                                                                               EARLY LIFE AND BIOGEOGRAPHY OF THE PALEOZOIC ERA
Precambrian Supereon
Te planet Earth formed about 4.6 billion years ago (BYA), but life didn’t appear for
approximately another 600 million years, late in the Hadean Eon. Early single-celled organisms
were chemosynthetic, oxidizing inorganic materials for energy. Te last universal common
ancestor appeared in the early Archean Eon. Fig. 7.1 shows a phylogenetic tree linking major
taxa to the last universal common ancestor, based on completely sequenced genomes. By 3.5
BYA, prokaryotes, bacteria and archaea had appeared, and some bacteria were photosynthetic,
although they did not produce oxygen as a byproduct. Photosynthetic oxygen-producing
cyanobacteria appeared about 3 BYA, eventually paving the way for aerobic organisms. Single-
celled eukaryotes first came on the scene in the Proterozoic Eon, about 2 BYA. Complex
multicellular organisms had appeared by the late Proterozoic.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
106

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Historical Biogeography
Figure 7.1: Phylogenic tree of life. Eukaryotes are colored red, archaea green and bacteria blue.
The central node represents the last universal common ancestor.
(Wikipedia ‘Phylogenetic tree;’ Attribution: User A1)
Cambrian period
Te Phanerozoic Eon opened with the Cambrian Period of the Paleozoic Era, ca. 540 million
years ago (MYA). See Fig. 5.12 for timeline of geological periods. Te Cambrian Period
opened with the Cambrian explosion, a relatively brief (20 to 25 million year) evolutionary
event in which major diversification occurred in the oceans, leading to the appearance of most
modern animal phyla. Included among these were the vertebrates (Phylum Chordata) and the
Phylum Arthropoda, such as Opabinia (Fig. 7.2), a close relative of the ancestral arthropods.
Climatically, the early Cambrian was cold, but would warm near the end of the period. Most
land mass was concentrated in the Southern Hemisphere early on, but over time separation
occurred with the land masses gradually moving north. Plants had yet to invade land in
the Cambrian, but fungi and microbes were beginning to contribute to soil formation that
would pave the way for terrestrial plants. Te dominant animal life in the oceans consisted of
arthropods such as trilobites (Fig. 7.3), although the trilobites are probably overrepresented in
the fossil record because of their heavy exoskeletons. Chordates and various shelled animals
appeared in the oceans during the Cambrian, and the first vertebrates arrived on the scene in
the form of the jawless, armored ostracoderms. Several extinction events caused a dramatic
decline in marine diversity in the late Cambrian.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
107

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                              Historical Biogeography
Figure 7.2: Artist’s impression of Opabinia, a close relative of the ancestral arthropods, at
the sea floor. (Wikipedia ‘Opabinia;’ Attribution: Nobu Tamura)
Figure 7.3: Olenoides superbus, a trilobite from the Cambrian period.
(Wikipedia ‘Olenoides;’ Attribution: Daderot)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
108

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                               Historical Biogeography
Ordovician period
Te Ordovician Period began ca. 485 MYA. By this time, southern continents were clustered
into a single landmass, Gondwana, which began the period near the equator, but gradually
drifted southward. Te more northern landmasses, Laurentia (which would eventually become
present day North America), Siberia, and Baltica (eventually to be northern Europe) were still
separated. High levels of CO2 and the accompanying greenhouse effect produced generally
high temperatures during the early Ordovician, with ocean temperatures probably well over
40°C. But by the mid-Ordovician the climate had cooled considerably, and the ensuing glacial
advances probably contributed to the large-scale extinction events during the latter part of
the period.
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:
“The perfect start
of a successful,
international career.”
CLICK HERE
to discover why both socially
and academically the University
of Groningen is one of the best
places for a student to be
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
109

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Historical Biogeography
Green algae were abundant in the Ordovician, and gave rise to the early non-vascular plants
that colonized shoreline areas in the late Ordovician-early Silurian. Early mycorrhizal fungi
helped facilitate this invasion through symbiotic relationships with plant roots, helping the
plants obtain nutrients. In the animal world, significant adaptive radiation took place in the
oceans during the period, with various filter feeding groups such as crinoids, brachiopods,
and bryozoans becoming abundant, as well as early cephalopods and corals. Shelled molluscs
such as bivalves, gastropods, and nautiloid cephalopods diversified as well. Trilobites remained
abundant, especially in the shallow continental seas, with many forms evolving elaborate
defenses, such as spines and stalked eyes, in response to the growing number of predators.
Te first jawed fish appeared in the late Ordovician.
Te end of the Ordovician is marked by the Ordovician extinction, the second largest mass
extinction in the Earth’s history. Probable causes of these extinction pulses were glaciation
associated with cooling temperatures. Tese cooling temperatures were likely the result of
multiple factors. Tese include an increase in volcanic activity and an associated decrease in
CO2 (a greenhouse gas) in the atmosphere, and the position of Gondwana over the South
Pole, which resulted in ice caps that increased the Earth’s albedo. Te high volcanic activity
deposited large amounts of silica rock, which draws CO2 from the atmosphere during the
erosion process. Tis decrease in CO2 in turn reduced the greenhouse effect. One effect of
glaciation was a decrease in ocean levels, which in turned caused a decline in the shallow
continental seas that supported so much of Ordovician biodiversity.
Silurian period
Te Silurian Period began ca. 444 MYA. During this period, Gondwana remained intact,
covering much of the equatorial and southern hemisphere regions. Further north, a second
supercontinent, Euramerica (also known as Laurussia, not to be confused with the later
supercontinent Laurasia), was forming through the collision of several tectonic plates. Te
climate during much of the Silurian was generally warm and stable, and melting ice caps
increased ocean levels. Later in the period, cooling resulted in lowering of ocean levels.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
110

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                       Historical Biogeography
Late in the Silurian, vascular plants (land plants that have specialized vascular tissues that conduct
water and nutrients) appeared and diversified. Te first recognizable fossils of land animals
were arthropods that also appeared in the late Silurian. Te arthropod exoskeleton provided
effective pre-adaptations for support, resistance to desiccation, and efficient locomotion on
land. Tese are important features for organisms surrounded by dry air and at the mercy of
gravity without the buoyancy that water provides. Sea scorpions (eurypterids) were abundant
predators in the oceans, particularly shallow sea habitats. Some of these arthropods reached
over 2 m in length. Also in the oceans, suspension feeders such as brachiopods, bryozoans, and
crinoids remained abundant and diverse, as well as trilobites and molluscs. Te first bony fish
appeared in the form of the Acanthodii, shark-like fish with skeletons that had cartilaginous
as well as bony components.
Devonian period
Te Devonian Period began roughly 420 MYA, at a time when Euramerica and Gondwana
were moving together (Fig. 7.4) to eventually form the giant supercontinent Pangaea. Tis
period was relatively warm and glacier-free, with high ocean levels. In the marine environment,
jawed fish and armored placoderms were abundant, although the placoderms would disappear
by the end of the period. Te Devonian is often referred to as the “age of fishes” because of the
great diversity of this group during the period. Among the marine invertebrates, brachiopods,
bryozoans, crinoids, trilobites, and corals continued to be abundant, and ammonites (primarily
spiral-shelled cephalopods) first appeared.
Figure 7.4: Positions of the landmasses and Paleotethys Ocean during the
middle Devonian (Wikipedia ‘Devonian;’ Attribution: http://www-sst.unil.ch/
research/plate_tecto/alp_tet_main.htm#Introduction)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
111

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Historical Biogeography
In the terrestrial environment, plant colonization and diversification accelerated. Rooted plants
were contributing to further soil development. By the mid-Devonian, shrubby forests consisting
of ferns, horsetails, lycophytes, and progymnosperms had appeared. In the late Devonian, the
first true trees would appear in the form of certain progymnosperms that would eventually
give rise to the true gymnosperms. By the end of the period, the first seed plants (land plants
that produce embryos with a protective outer covering) had appeared. Te well-developed
soils harbored mites, myriapods, and other arthropods. Te first probable insects appeared in
the early Devonian; this would lead to the long coevolutionary relationship between insects
and plants. Te first tetrapods, evolving from lobe-finned fish in shallow coastal waters, had
appeared by the mid-Devonian as well.
American online
LIGS University
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc,
DBA and PhD  programs:
▶▶                                                                                                  enroll by September 30th, 2014 and
▶▶                                                                                                  save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶                                                                                                  pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶                                                                                                  Interactive Online education
▶▶                                                                                                  visit www.ligsuniversity.com to
find out more!
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed
by the US Secretary of Education.
More info here.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
112

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Historical Biogeography
Carboniferous period
Te Carboniferous Period began ca. 359 MYA. Te period is named for the abundance of
coal deposits that formed as a result of burial of lowland forests under soil. Tis eventually
resulted in trapped carbon in buried peat bogs. High pressures and high temperatures converted
this dead vegetation to coal. During the Carboniferous, the single supercontinent Pangaea
was forming. Te early Carboniferous was relatively warm, with high ocean levels, but a
cooling trend occurred in the mid-Carboniferous. Lowering ocean levels led to a large marine
extinction. Te cooler, drier climate also led to the Carboniferous rainforest collapse, in which
the extensive rainforests of the Euramerican equatorial belt were fragmented into smaller and
smaller islands. Lycophytes disappeared and tree ferns (not to be confused with Glossopteris
and other seed ferns) became dominant. Among the tropical animals, amphibians declined
while reptiles increased in abundance and diversity. Plant life of the early Carboniferous
was dominated by horsetails, club mosses, and ferns, with cycads, conifers, and the tree-like
lycopodiophyte Sigillaria (Fig. 7.5) appearing later in the period. Te Division Lycopodiophyta
is the oldest extant vascular plant division.
Figure 7.5: Ancient in situ Lycopodiophyta, probably Sigillaria, from the Joggins Formation
(Pennsylvanian), Cumberland Basin, Nova Scotia. (Wikipedia ‘Carboniferous;’ Attribution: Michael C.
Rygel via Wikimedia Commons)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
113

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Historical Biogeography
Most of the dominant Devonian marine invertebrates, such as brachiopods, bryozoans, and
crinoids, continued to be abundant in the Carboniferous, and bivalve molluscs increased
in importance. However, by this time the trilobites were declining toward their eventual
extinction at the end of the Permian. Bivalve molluscs were becoming abundant in freshwater
environments as well, and amphibious sea scorpions (eurypterids) were also common in these
habitats. Shark diversity increased dramatically in the Carboniferous oceans, possibly as a
result of open ecological niches left by the extinction of the placoderms.
On land, insects and other arthropods were abundant, and some of these reached unusually
large sizes. Tese included millipede-like arthropods over 2 m in length, and some of the
dragonfly-like griffinflies, which had wingspans of well over a half meter. Explanations for
these unusually large insects are still under debate. One possibility is the very high oxygen
content of the atmosphere at this time. Insects obtain oxygen primarily by diffusion through
their tracheal system, a network of tubes that runs throughout the body. Te rate of oxygen
diffusion places an upper limit on insect body size, a limit that would have been relaxed
in the high oxygen environment of the Carboniferous. It has also been suggested that the
absence of flying vertebrate predators played a role in allowing these flying insects to evolve
such large body sizes.
Among the vertebrates, amphibians were abundant and diverse in the early Carboniferous, but
declined as a result of the aforementioned rainforest collapse. In contrast, a major evolutionary
innovation allowed reptiles to survive and flourish in drier environments. Tis was the amniote
egg, with a sturdy outer shell and sac-like allantois that prevented desiccation while still
allowing gas exchange and waste storage. Te pelycosaurs, an early synapsid (tetrapods with
one or more fenestrae, or holes, in the temporal bone of the skull) amniote group, appeared in
the late Carboniferous. Te synapsids would give rise to the therapsids, a lineage that would
lead to the mammals.
Permian period
Te Permian period, the last period of the Paleozoic Era, began ca. 299 MYA. During the
Permian, the landmasses were formed into one supercontinent, Pangaea (Fig. 7.6). Te existence
of a single landmass contributed to a continental climate with extremes of heat and cold, and
increased aridity in the interior regions. Tese conditions in turn played a great role in the
evolutionary patterns shown by many plant and animal groups. At the beginning of the period,
the cool temperatures and extensive glaciation from the end of the Carboniferous continued;
later in the Permian, dry conditions and cycles of warm and cold temperatures predominated.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
114

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                 Historical Biogeography
Figure 7.6: Early formation of Pangaea, about 290 million years ago in the early
Permian. (Wikipedia ‘Paleo-Tethys Ocean;’ Attribution: http://www-sst.unil.ch/
research/plate_tecto/alp_tet.htm)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
115

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Historical Biogeography
In the marine environment, many of the groups that were dominant in the Carboniferous
continued to be predominant. Corals, echinoderms, and molluscs were abundant; these animals,
as well as brachiopods, sponges, foraminiferans, and bryozoans formed rich shallow-water reef
communities. Bony fishes continued to diversify. On land, the dry continental conditions
favored the diversification of seed plants such as conifers, seed ferns, and cycads. Insects were
abundant, particularly various cockroach-like groups. Early in the period, amphibians were
abundant, but increased aridity favored reptiles. Te synapsids gave rise to the therapsids; these
animals had more complex skull, jaw, and tooth structure than the earlier pelycosaurs. Te
therapsid lineage would eventually give rise to the mammals. Te Permian period ended with
the Permian-Triassic mass extinction, the largest mass extinction in the Earth’s history. Tis
mass extinction probably had multiple distinct pulses or phases, causes by different factors,
including global warming caused by methane (a greenhouse gas) released from permafrost
and ocean sediments, volcanism, and one or more meteor impact events. Tis event saw the
extinction of over 90% of marine species and 70% of terrestrial species; it would take many
millions of years for the Earth to recover these losses in biodiversity.
7.3                                                                                                 BIOGEOGRAPHY OF THE MESOZOIC ERA
Triassic period
Te Triassic period marks the beginning of the Mesozoic Era, and began about 252 MYA.
During the Triassic, Pangaea persisted, surrounded by the world-wide ocean Panthalassa and
partially bisected by the Tethys Sea (Fig. 7.7). Te climate was mostly hot and dry, although
there was more moisture near the poles, and periods of increased rainfall near the equator.
Tere was little or no glaciation during the Triassic. Plant life during the period was dominated
by conifers and other seed plants; the seed fern Glossopteris (Fig. 2.10) was abundant in the
southern hemisphere. Te large mass extinction at the end of the Permian opened many
new ecological niches that led to adaptive radiations. In the oceans, more modern corals
appeared, and ammonites remained abundant, descended from ancestors that survived the
mass extinction. Reptiles diversified in the oceans and on land, ultimately evolving into the
diverse forms that are the reason the Mesozoic is often referred to as the “age of reptiles.”
Plesiosaurs and ichthyosaurs became abundant and diverse in the marine world.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
116

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Historical Biogeography
Figure 7.7: Pangaea and oceans about 249 million years ago at the Permian-
Triassic boundary. (Wikipedia ‘Paleo-Tethys Ocean;’ Attribution: http://www-sst.
unil.ch/research/plate_tecto/alp_tet.htm)
In the terrestrial environment, early semiaquatic archosaurs would diversify from their
humble beginnings to eventually give rise to such dominant groups as dinosaurs and the
first flying vertebrates, the pterosaurs. Archosaurs became dominant in the Triassic; their
ability to eliminate nitrogenous wastes in the form of uric acid, which contains little water,
was advantageous in the arid Triassic climate. Teropod dinosaurs appeared in the Triassic;
this group would eventually give rise to the birds. Cynodonts, a group of therapsids that first
appeared in the Permian, would increase in importance in the Triassic and eventually lead to
the evolution of mammals.
Jurassic period
Te Jurassic Period began about 201 MYA; its beginning is marked by the Triassic-Jurassic
mass extinction. During this event, over half of all species went extinct, including all archosaurs
other than dinosaurs and crocodylomorphs. Many amphibian species went extinct as well.
Tis extinction event opened many ecological niches and made way for the diversification of
the dinosaurs, which would become dominant in the Jurassic. During this period, the climate
changed significantly; this was caused to a great extent by the splitting of Pangaea into two
supercontinents, the northern Laurasia and southern Gondwana. Tis created more coastline
relative to continental interior, leading to a general shift from arid to wetter conditions. As
was the case in the Triassic, the Jurassic climate was generally warm, with little glaciation.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
117

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Historical Biogeography
In the oceans, the dominant vertebrates were fish and marine reptiles such as ichthyosaurs
and plesiosaurs. Many planktonic groups appeared and diversified. High levels of precipitated
calcium carbonate produced large carbonate hardgrounds on the sea floor. Tis led to the
increased importance of encrusting and boring communities that caused bioerosion of these
hardgrounds. Rudists, a group of bivalve molluscs, appeared in the Jurassic and would become
major components of reef communities. On land, many groups of ferns were present. Conifers
and cycads were also common, as well as ginkgos. Te latter group is represented today by
one relict species, Ginkgo biloba, a species that is found in the wild in China, but grown as an
ornamental throughout the world. Te flowering plants, or angiosperms, appeared in the late
Jurassic, but would not achieve dominance until the Cretaceous. Reptiles, and dinosaurs in
particular, were the dominant vertebrates (Fig. 7.8). Sauropods, huge plant-eating dinosaurs
such as Brachiosaurus and Brontosaurus, roamed the fern thickets and forests, and were preyed
on by predatory theropods such as Torvosaurus and Allosaurus. Within the theropod clade,
the first birds appeared in the late Jurassic. Te first mammals also appeared, primarily in the
form of nocturnal insectivores.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
118

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Historical Biogeography
Figure 7.8: Various dinosaurs roamed forests of similarly large conifers during the Jurassic period.
(Wikipedia ‘Jurassic;’ Attribution: Gerhard Boeggemann)
Cretaceous period
Te Cretaceous Period began about 145 MYA and spanned 79 million years, making it the
longest period in the Phanerozoic Eon. Tis period would see the continued separation of
the landmasses, with Laurasia and Gondwana breaking up into the recognizable present day
continents, although in different positions than they are today. With the exception of a cooling
trend that began in the late Jurassic and extended into the early Cretaceous, the Cretaceous
Period was relatively warm. Tis warming trend is thought to have been due primarily to the
greenhouse effect of carbon dioxide produced by volcanic activity.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
119

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Historical Biogeography
In the oceans, modern sharks and ray-finned fishes appeared. Marine reptiles such as ichthyosaurs
and plesiosaurs (Fig. 7.9) remained dominant through most of the Cretaceous, but near the
end of the period ichthyosaurs would decline, to be replaced by the mososaurs. Rudist bivalves
were abundant, as were straight-shelled cephalopods in the genus Baculites. Sea stars and other
echinoderms flourished, and diatoms diversified as well. On land, some groups of conifers and
ferns continued to thrive as well. Angiosperms continued to spread and diversify, becoming
the dominant group of plants by the end of the period. Tis coincided with the continued
diversification of insects; coevolutionary relationships between angiosperms and pollinating
beetles, flies, butterflies and moths, and especially bees have provided important selective
pressures driving diversification. Among the vertebrates, mammals continued to radiate. But
reptiles, in particular the dinosaurs, continued to remain dominant. Tese included such
well-known dinosaurs as Tyrannosaurus rex, Triceratops, and Velociraptor of Jurassic Park movie
fame. Te pterosaurs declined in the latter part of the period; this was once thought to be due
to competition with birds, but patterns of bird diversification do not appear to correspond
to pterosaur decline.
Figure 7.9: Kronosaurus queenslandicus preying on another plesiosaur,
Woolungasaurus. (Wikipedia ‘Cretaceous;’ Attribution: Dmitry Bogdanov)
Te Cretaceous was brought to a close by the Cretaceous-Paleogene mass extinction. While
other factors may have played a role, the widely accepted cause of this mass extinction is
an asteroid impact on the coast of Yucatán, Mexico. Tis hypothesis was first proposed by
Nobel Prize-winning physicist Luis Alvarez (1911-1988) and his research team, which
discovered extremely high concentrations of the element iridium (an element found in high
concentrations in many asteroids) in Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary sedimentary layers
worldwide. Since then, their hypothesis has been supported by the presence of tiny droplets
of crystalized molten rock at the boundary layer, and, finally, the discovery of a very large
crater on the Yucatán Peninsula.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
120

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                              Historical Biogeography
Such an impact would have created a cloud of dust and aerosols in the air that would have
dramatically decreased the amount of sunlight reaching the Earth. Te disturbance would
have taken years to dissipate. Extinction of photosynthetic plants and phytoplankton was
accompanied by disappearance of the herbivores dependent on them, and consequently their
predators. Most famously, the non-avian dinosaurs went extinct, although some paleontologists
believe that some survived into the Paleocene Epoch. Tis would be an example of a “dead
clade walking;” a taxon that survives a mass extinction and persists for a few million years,
but never recovers and eventually goes extinct. However, the evidence for Paleocene dinosaurs
is scant, and most paleontologists reject this argument. In the marine environment, ca. 75%
of species went extinct; among land animals, only insects and other invertebrates, and small
vertebrates, survived. Detritivores                                                             (animals that feed on non-living organic material, or
detritus), and animals that depended on detritivores as food, fared relatively well compared
to herbivores and their predators. Tis makes sense, for most of the available food would have
been in the form of dead, rather than living, plants and animals. Recovery of biodiversity
from this event was slow, but eventually the profusion of available ecological niches led to
the large evolutionary radiations of the Paleogene Period.
Top master’s programmes
Join the best at
                                                                                                •                                                       33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc
                                                                                                International Business
the Maastricht University
                                                                                                •                                                       1st place: MSc International Business
                                                                                                •                                                       1st place: MSc Financial Economics
School of Business and
                                                                                                •                                                       2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
                                                                                                •                                                       2nd place: MSc Economics
Economics!                                                                                      •                                                       2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
                                                                                                •                                                       2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012;
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
(Elsevier)
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
www.mastersopenday.nl
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
121

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                                                    Historical Biogeography
7.4                                                                                                BIOGEOGRAPHY OF THE CENOZOIC ERA
Paleogene period
Te Paleogene Period was the first period of the Cenozoic Era, and began about 66 MYA. Te
period consists of the Paleocene, Eocene, and Oligocene Epochs. Te Paleocene Epoch lasted
until about 56 MYA. Te epoch is bounded by the aforementioned Cretaceous-Paleogene
mass extinction and the Paleocene-Eocene Termal Maximum, a period of dramatic warming.
During the Paleocene, the continents continued to break up and move toward their present-
day positions. Te mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous left many available ecological
niches, and during the early Paleocene the marine biota was rather impoverished. However,
over time, marine biodiversity rebounded, and began to resemble our present day fauna. Te
demise of marine reptiles at the end of the Cretaceous opened the way for diversification of
the sharks, and tropical conditions at the end of the Paleocene led to abundant and diverse
vertebrate and invertebrate life, including diverse coral reef communities. Marine mammals,
however, would not appear until the Eocene.
Soon after the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event, ferns became dominant on land; this
may provide further evidence of an asteroid strike, since many ferns are known to colonize fire-
disturbed areas quickly. But over time, the plant world began to take on a modern look. Palms
appeared, and forest cover was abundant, including widespread rain forests late in the epoch.
Angiosperms rebounded from the mass extinction event and achieved dominance, along with
their insect pollinators. Te small mammals and other vertebrates that survived the extinction
event underwent large-scale adaptive radiations in the Paleocene, growing larger and invading
available niches. Tese included many modern groups. Reptiles such as crocodylians, turtles,
snakes, and lizards were abundant, and birds continued the dinosaur lineage, including large
flightless birds such as the predatory phorusrhacids, or “terror birds.” Tese imposing birds
ranged up to 3 m in height, and were top predators in South America during the Cenozoic.
Among the mammals, the first monotremes appeared, as well as early marsupials, and later the
placentals. Te latter group, which in time would come to dominate the world’s mammalian
fauna, was represented by early primate-like and insectivore-like mammals, among others. A
separate lineage, the rodent-like multituberculates, also appeared, and would survive for 120
million years, the longest period of any mammal lineage. Te “archaic” Paleocene mammals
were still anatomically primitive and had small brains compared to most modern mammals.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
122

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Historical Biogeography
Te Eocene Epoch began about 56 MYA. Tis epoch was characterized by a widely varying
climate, beginning with the very warm period during the Paleocene-Eocene Termal Maximum
(PETM), but then cooling gradually for the remainder of the epoch. During the Eocene, the
high levels of CO2 in the atmosphere that contributed to the PETM gradually decreased due
to sequestration of CO2 at the bottom of the Arctic Ocean, probably as a result of large-scale
organic carbon burial. Landmasses continued toward their present-day positions, with Australia
breaking away from Antarctica about 45 MYA and Laurasia beginning to separate as North
America, Greenland, and Europe moved apart. India would collide with Asia, beginning
the formation of the Himalayas. Te high early Eocene temperatures supported widespread
forests, but as the climate cooled later in the epoch, the lush evergreen tropical forests were
largely replaced by deciduous forests.
In the oceans, fish continued to diversify, and marine mammals made their first appearance,
including the cetaceans. On land, mammals continued to increase in importance (Fig. 7.10).
Te early ungulates appeared, including representatives of the modern hoofed ungulates, such
as Eohippus (“dawn horse”). Strange carnivorous ungulates were present as well. Tese included
Mesonyx, with toes that ended in small hooves instead of claws, and the giant Andrewsarchus
mongoliensis, known only from a single large skull and some fragments of bone. Proportional
to its head, the body of A. mongoliensis was about 3.5 m long, with a height of about 1.8 m at
the shoulder. Tis means that A. mongoliensis may rival the South American short-faced bear,
Arctotherium, for the title of largest terrestrial carnivorous mammal. Nimravids, close relatives
of cats, appeared in the middle Eocene. Tese were predatory animals that are sometimes
called “false saber-toothed cats” because they show convergent evolution with Smilodon saber-
toothed cats in many respects. Te first primates also appeared, either in the late Paleocene
or early Eocene. Tese were represented by the small, rodent-like genus Purgatorius; quite
a humble beginning for an order that would eventually give rise to humans. Early forms of
most present day mammal orders appeared in the Eocene. Atmospheric oxygen levels were
high during much of the Eocene, perhaps contributing to increased brain size, body size,
and dominance of mammals, particularly placentals. Large brains require large amounts of
oxygen, and high oxygen levels are also advantageous to pregnant females which must provide
substantial amounts to the developing fetus. Te end of the Eocene saw a large extinction
event, although not at the same level as the larger mass extinctions. Tere appears to be a
variety of potential causes for the Eocene-Oligocene extinction, including cooling climate,
large-scale volcanic activity, and meteor impacts.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
123

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                             Historical Biogeography
Figure 7.10: Depiction of the Eocene fauna of North America.
(Wikipedia ‘Eocene;’ Attribution: Jay Matternes)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
124

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Historical Biogeography
Te Oligocene Epoch, the final epoch of the Paleogene Period, began about 34 MYA. Tis
epoch was characterized by a generally cool, dry climate compared to the rest of the Paleogene.
South America detached from Antarctica and drifted north, and Antarctica became colder
due to the now uninterrupted flow of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, which isolated the
continent from warmer waters. In general, the oceans cooled during the Oligocene, and as the
continents continued to move toward present-day positions, ocean circulation patterns began
to take on a modern look as well. A land bridge between North America and Europe allowed
exchange between these two continents, resulting in increased similarity of the faunas of the
two landmasses. Tectonic activity resulted in mountain formation in western North America
and Europe. Te more arid climate favored the continued expansion of temperate deciduous
forests at the expense of tropical forests; more open grasslands and deserts increased as well.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
125

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Historical Biogeography
Te expansion of grasslands led to spread of animal groups associated with them, such as
horses, camels, and rhinoceroses, as well as the pig-like merycoidodontoids. Te first true felid,
Proailurus, appeared in the Oligocene in Asia. Tis was a relatively small, partially arboreal
cat, about the size of a bobcat or lynx. Te isolation of South America led to the evolution
of a rather unique and often strange fauna, including mastodon and rhinoceros-like species,
terrestrial crocodilian relatives, and the aforementioned terror birds. Camels, rhinoceroses,
and horses roamed central North America. In Asia, Paraceratherium, an extinct genus of
hornless rhinoceros, roamed the shrublands and forests, browsing on leafy plant material.
Tese animals were perhaps the largest terrestrial mammals that have ever existed, weighing
in at 15 to 20 tons - roughly the size of a Brontosaurus.
In the oceans, modern groups of bivalve molluscs and polychaete worms appeared. Carcharhinid
sharks appeared and began to diversify as well. Tis family includes roughly 60 extant species,
including such well-known species as the tiger shark and oceanic whitetip shark. Cetaceans
continued to diversify, and evolved echolocation, a major adaptive feature. Te first pinnipeds
appeared in the late Oligocene. At the end of the Oligocene the climate underwent a warming
trend, but this was interrupted by a dramatic cooling event as the Earth moved into the
Neogene Period and Miocene Epoch.
Neogene period
Te Neogene Period and Miocene Epoch began about 23 MYA. Rather than being defined by
discrete global events, the Miocene boundaries reflect regional transitions between the relatively
warm Oligocene and the cooler Pliocene. During the Miocene, the continents continued to
bear greater resemblance to today’s configuration. Tectonic activity caused further mountain
formation in western North America, Europe, and eastern Asia. South American continued
to move north, and the Andes began to form as a result of contact with the western Pacific
subduction zone. Te Isthmus of Panama had yet to form though, so South America and
North America remained separated. Climatically, the Miocene was still relatively warm, but
overall a general cooling trend continued, accompanied by increasing aridity. By the end
of the epoch, the Antarctic ice sheet had increased in size and thickness, and glaciers were
forming in Greenland.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
126

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                              Historical Biogeography
Rain forests continued to contract and grasslands expanded. Deeper, richer grassland soils
acted as a carbon sink, reducing atmospheric CO2 and contributing to the cooling climate.
Late in the Miocene, C4 grasses appeared and increased in importance. Relative to C3 grasses,
C4 grasses are at a competitive advantage in arid conditions because they use water more
efficiently during photosynthesis. Accompanying the expansion of grasslands were large
numbers of diverse grazing ungulates (Fig. 7.11). Horses, deer and camels were abundant.
Te predatory nimravids persisted, as well as entelodonts, huge, pig-like animals that first
appeared in the Eocene. Tese creatures are sometimes referred to as “terminator pigs,” and
reached sizes of over 400 kg and over 2 m at the shoulder. Like modern pigs, these animals
were omnivores, but leaned toward carrion and live prey such as large ungulates. Hominoidea
(apes) were diverse in the Miocene. Most modern mammal and bird families had appeared
by the end of the Miocene.
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
127

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Historical Biogeography
Figure 7.11: Depiction of the Miocene fauna of North America.
(Wikipedia ‘Miocene;’ Attribution: Jay Matternes)
In the oceans, whales and sharks were abundant and diverse. Kelp forests supported diverse
vertebrate and invertebrate assemblages. In South America, freshwater habitats contained a
variety of crocodilians, including the 12-meter long Mourasuchus which, despite its large size,
probably collected food in a filter-feeding manner. Mourasuchus would sweep its shovel-like
jaws through the water, and then use its rows of numerous small teeth to trap the prey as the
water was forced out. South American waters were also home to Megapiranha, a now-extinct
piranha that reached lengths of almost a meter. A series of extinctions, known as the Middle
Miocene disruption, occurred around 14.8 to 14.5 MYA, probably as a result of a dramatic
cooling period. Te Miocene Epoch ended, and the Pliocene began, about 5.3 MYA.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
128

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Historical Biogeography
During the Pliocene, the continents continued to drift to positions very close to their modern
day configuration. A major geological event during the Pliocene was the formation of the
Isthmus of Panama, which was completed about 3 MYA. Tis event would have dramatic
ramifications both climatically, and in terms of the Earth’s biota, particularly that of South
America. Lowering ocean levels would also expose the land bridge connection between North
America and Asia. Te Mediterranean Sea would form as a result of the joining of Africa
and Europe.
Climatically, the Pliocene continued to become cooler, drier, and more seasonal, though
temperatures were still slightly warmer than today’s. Tere were several possible reasons for
this cooling trend. Te formation of the Isthmus of Panama disrupted the flow of warm
equatorial ocean currents, leading to the cooling of the now isolated Atlantic Ocean by waters
from the Antarctic and Arctic regions. Also, formation of mountain chains such as the Rocky
Mountains of western North America may have disrupted jet stream flow, leading to cooler
temperatures. Finally, there was a decrease in atmospheric CO2 that may have lessened the
greenhouse effect during the Pliocene. Increased glaciation could have led to further cooling
by increasing the Earth’s albedo. Tese changing climatic conditions led to further increases in
grasslands, savannas, and deserts, increasing deciduous and coniferous forests, and reduction
of tropical forests. Marine and terrestrial faunas were increasingly similar to modern-day
forms. In Africa, ungulates were abundant, and primates continued to diversify. Te Tribe
Hominini arrived on the scene, and this lineage would eventually lead to humans and our
close relatives. Snakes continued to evolve, and the first rattlesnakes appeared.
Te most dramatic changes in biogeographical patterns occurred as a result of the “Great
American Interchange” associated with the formation of the Isthmus of Panama. Tis land
bridge allowed two-way dispersal of flora and fauna between continents. Before this connection
formed, South America had been isolated for tens of millions of years since its separation
from Antarctica. In its isolation South America evolved a biota rivaling that of Australia in
its uniqueness. South America was home to huge xenarthrans such as ground sloths and
armadillo-like glyptodonts. Tere was also a unique ungulate fauna that included the camel-
like Macrauchenia and other members of the Order Litopterna, as well as a diverse group of
ungulates known as the notoungulates. Caviomorph rodents flourished as well. Tis group
includes the capybara, porcupine, and guinea pig, as well as the largest of all rodents, the
extinct Josephoartigasia monesi. Tis giant weighed in at one ton, about 20 times the weight
of today’s largest rodent, the capybara. Extinct predators include the aforementioned terror
birds, as well as the cougar-like Tylacosmilus. With its oversized canines, this marsupial “cat”
showed convergent evolution with the later saber-toothed placental cats (Smilodon) of the
Pleistocene. In both cases, the bite was probably relatively weak compared to that of similarly-
sized modern-day predatory cats such as the leopard. But the strong cervical vertebrae and
powerful neck muscles give away these saber-tooths’ modus operandi - rather than biting, the
large canines were used in a powerful stabbing motion.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
129

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Historical Biogeography
Before the formation of the Panamanian land bridge, South America was home to a rich
variety of rodent-, rabbit-, cat-, and bear-like marsupials that shared the continent with their
placental cousins for millions of years. But significant change would come in the form of the
Great American Interchange made possible by the land bridge. Tis interchange has been the
subject of detailed analyses, particularly by paleontologists Larry Marshall and David Webb,
who wrote many groundbreaking papers on the subject in the 1970s and 80s. Based on
Marshall and Webb’s 1982 paper in the journal Science, 24 North American genera dispersed
southward, whereas only 12 South American genera dispersed northward. Tese numbers
represented similar proportions of the numbers of genera of the respective continents at that
time. Immigrants from North America included small and medium-sized mammals such as
rodents, rabbits, shrews, raccoons, and foxes, but also some larger mammals such as bears,
horses, llamas, and mastodons (Fig. 7.12). Te short-faced bear, Arctotherium, may have been
the world’s largest terrestrial carnivorous mammal, weighing in at about 1.5 tons. In the other
direction, opossums, porcupines, armadillos, glyptodonts, the notoungulate Mixotoxodon, and
ground sloths were among the dispersers.
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s
Brain power                                                                                        electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the
world’s wind turbines.
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air.
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity,
industries can boost performance beyond expectations.
Therefore we need the best employees who can
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering.
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
130

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                              Historical Biogeography
Figure 7.12: Examples of migrant species in the Americas after the formation of
the Isthmus of Panama. Olive green silhouettes denote North American species
with South American ancestors; blue silhouettes denote South American species of
North American origin. (Wikipedia ‘Pliocene;’ Attribution: Woudloper)
By any measure, the southward dispersers from North America were more successful. Dispersing
mammals from North America left about 85 descendent genera in South America; this accounts
for about 50% of the total present-day mammal genera of South America. In present-day North
America, on the other hand, only 29 genera, or 21% of the total, are descended from South
American dispersers. Tis result is due to a combination of two interrelated factors - greater
adaptive radiation of North American dispersers in South America, and higher extinction rates
of native South American genera. In South America, nearly all of the once diverse marsupial
fauna went extinct; only the “monito del monte” (a tiny, arboreal, mouse-like marsupial),
the order Paucituberculata (several species of shrew- or rat-like marsupials known as “shrew
opossums”), and the true opossums (Family Didelphidae) remain. Te latter group is widespread,
and the Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana) is even found throughout much of North
America. But the monito del monte is found only in the highlands of southwestern South
America (Chile and Argentina), and the shrew opossums only in the Andes Mountains.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
131

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Historical Biogeography
Other South American mammals suffered as well in the aftermath of the Great American
Interchange. Invasion by North American saber-toothed cats, bears, and various canids led to
the demise of many large South American herbivores. All litopterns except Macrauchenia and the
closely related Xenorhinotherium died out, as did many notoungulates. Many South American
carnivores lost out in competition with the North American invaders as well. Phorusrhacids
and sparassodonts were displaced. South American dispersers moving north had much less
success, although the Virginia opossum, nine-banded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), and
North American porcupine (Erethizon dorsatum) have survived and flourished. Others, such
as glyptodonts, giant sloths, and phorusrhacids made it to North America, but subsequently
went extinct.
Tere have been several explanations proposed for this asymmetrical success rate. One of
these explanations rests on the long period of isolation that South America underwent after
separation from Antarctica. As we saw when we discussed island biogeography (Chapter 6),
it is well known that isolated species on small islands are often at a great disadvantage when
faced with newly introduced predators or competitors from the mainland. Te same principle
appears to apply, albeit to a lesser extent, to larger isolated landmasses as well. During the
Cenozoic, North America was linked to Eurasia via the Bering Land Bridge, and Africa was
connected to Eurasia as well. Tis meant that there was a vast, contiguous land area containing
a great diversity of species competing with each other, and preying on and evading each other,
all in a wide variety of different habitats and climatic conditions. Under these conditions,
the Northern Hemisphere’s evolutionary arms race produced swifter, more intelligent, and
more competitive species. South America, on the other hand, was a smaller landmass that had
been isolated for millions of years. During South America’s isolation, its species interacted
with fewer competitors and predators, and there were far fewer individuals and much smaller
gene pools to provide the raw material of evolutionary innovation. Tus, during and in the
aftermath of the Great American Interchange, South American mammals were at a competitive
disadvantage in their newly-established interactions with their North American counterparts.
But there were other factors at play as well. To begin with, climate favored the North American
dispersers. Te climate of Central America is more similar to that of South America (tropical)
than to North America. So dispersers moving south into South America would have of necessity
already been well adapted to the tropical climate, whereas dispersers moving north would
have encountered very different, drier and cooler conditions in southern and central Mexico.
Also, a cooling climate at the time was producing a more arid, savanna environment in the
region, which favored the North American species at the expense of the South American
species, which were more adapted to tropical closed forest environments. It appears that
lower competitiveness or intelligence among the South American groups does not tell the
complete story of the Great American Interchange. About 2.6 MYA, the Pliocene ended and
the Quaternary Period and Pleistocene Epoch began.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
132

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Historical Biogeography
Quaternary period
Te Quaternary Period is divided into two Epochs: the Pleistocene, from 2.6 MYA to 11,700
years ago, and the Holocene, from 11,700 years ago to the present. During the Pleistocene,
the continents were in essentially their present-day positions. Tis epoch was characterized
by repeated cycles of glaciation. At least 11 major glacial events occurred in the Pleistocene,
punctuated by relatively mild periods, or “interglacials,” which are warm and extended enough
for temperate vegetation to exist. A shorter, cooler event, in which conditions might support
boreal taxa, is known as an “interstadial.” Several factors drive the process of glaciation.
Important among these are the development of ice sheets at the poles and in Greenland.
Tese ice sheets have higher albedo, or reflectivity, than the Earth as a whole. Tis means
that, when these ice sheets are present, more of the incoming solar radiation is reflected rather
than retained, leading to planetary cooling and a potential ice age.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
133

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Historical Biogeography
But how can the fairly regular pattern of cold and warmer periods during an ice age be
explained? An explanation, now widely accepted, for this pattern was proposed in the 1930s
by Milutin Milanković (1879-1958; Fig. 7.13), a Serbian mathematician, climatologist, and
geophysicist. Interestingly, Milanković apparently began some of the early work on his theory
while he was imprisoned. He was on honeymoon with his new bride in Austro-Hungary near
the outbreak of World War I. Tensions were high between Austro-Hungary and Serbia, and,
being a Serbian citizen, Milanković was arrested. However, a friend arranged for Milanković
to serve his captivity in Budapest so he could continue his work.
Figure 7.13: Milutin Milanković, Serbian scientist who explained the
cyclical pattern of the Earth’s climate using “Milanković cycles”.
(Wikipedia ‘Milutin Milanković;’ Attribution: Source unknown)
Milanković’s theory rested on three factors: the Earth’s orbital eccentricity (the elliptical,
rather than circular, shape of the Earth’s orbit around the sun); the tilt of the Earth’s axis;
and the variation in orientation, or “wobble,” of the Earth’s axis. All of these factors affect
the amount of solar energy reaching the Earth and, since these three phenomena all follow
predictable patterns, Milanković reasoned that combining them should make it possible to
predict climate change patterns. More recent research and evidence have largely verified and
improved on Milanković’s theory. A particularly important paper in this area was published
by James Hays, John Imbrie, and Nicholas Shackleton in 1976 in the journal Science. Tis
paper confirmed that these “Milanković cycles” can be detected in marine sediments, and
played a great role in bringing Milanković’s theory to the forefront.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
134

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                               Historical Biogeography
Te predominately cold climate, dramatic climate changes, and advancing/receding glaciers
had dramatic impacts on Pleistocene flora and fauna. During ice sheet expansion, many
regions that are now temperate forests were either occupied by tundra vegetation, or even
glaciated. During interglacials, the reverse was true. In each case, relatively small refugia
provided environments in which isolated groups of species could survive. For instance, some
high altitude locations remain tundra during interglacials, allowing organisms adapted to such
conditions to survive in isolated pockets.
During the Pleistocene, terrestrial and marine faunas were similar to those of the present
day in general, but the epoch did play host to an amazing group of animals known as the
Pleistocene megafauna. Many of these were holdovers from the Neogene. Te Pleistocene
megafauna (Fig. 7.14) varied somewhat from continent to continent, but included, among
others, giant sloths, the American lion                                                          (the largest subspecies of lion), mammoths and
mastodons, glyptodonts, saber-toothed cats, cave bears, short-faced bears, three now-extinct
species of bison, wooly rhinos, and the Irish elk, with its massive antlers. Large birds were
present as well, including the now-extinct giant condor, Aiolornis incredibilis. With a 5 m
wingspan, this was one of the largest known flight-capable birds.
Figure 7.14: Pleistocene fauna of what is now northern Spain.
(Wikipedia ‘Pleistocene;’ Attribution: Mauricio Antón, Public Library of Science)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
135

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Historical Biogeography
Australia was home to a variety of large marsupials, including the “marsupial lion,” Tylacoleo
carnifex, and giant 3-meter long wombats (Diprotodon). Tree-meter tall flightless birds in the
Family Dromornithidae also graced the Australian landscape; with their powerful crushing
beaks, these birds may have filled a predator/scavenger niche similar to that occupied by today’s
hyenas. Te Pleistocene fauna of Australia also included giant snakes in the genus Wonambi.
Tese snakes reached up to 6 m in length. Tey were probably predators that ambushed such
prey as kangaroos and wallabies, and killed them through constriction. Tese snakes achieved
mythical status in aboriginal cultures. All of the megafauna species described above are now
extinct, probably due to a great extent to the spread of another species that would begin to
assert its dominance in the Pleistocene, Homo sapiens. Much of the megafaunal extinctions took
place during the transition from the Pleistocene to the Holocene Epoch. Te Holocene epoch
will be discussed in the next chapter, which addresses human evolution and biogeography.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
136

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                                                   Historical Biogeography
7.5                                                                                                 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Cox, CB & Moore, PD 2010, Biogeography: an ecological and evolutionary approach, 8th edn.
John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Gradstein, FM, Ogg, JG & Smith, AG, eds. 2004, A geologic time scale 2004. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, England.
Hays, JD, Imbrie, J & Shackleton, NJ 1976, ‘Variations in the Earth’s orbit: pacemaker of
the ice ages’, Science, vol. 194, no. 4270, pp. 1121-1132.
Knoll, AH, Walter, MR, Narbonne, GM & Christie-Blick, N 2004, ‘A new period for the
geologic time scale’, Science, vol. 305, no. 5684, pp. 621-622.
Levin, H 2013, Te Earth through time, 10th ed. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Lomolino, MV, Riddle, BR, Whittaker, RJ & Brown, JH 2010, Biogeography, 4th edn. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts.
Marshall, LG, Webb, SD, Sepkosli, JJ, Jr & Raup, DM 1982, ‘Mammalian evolution and
the great American interchange’, Science, vol. 215, no. 4538, pp. 1351-1357.
McCarthy, D 2009, Here be dragons: how the study of animal and plant distributions revolutionized
our views of life and Earth. Oxford University Press, New York.
Roe, G 2006, ‘In defense of Milankovitch’, Geophysical Research Letters, vol. 33, no. 24,
p. L24703.
Stehli, FG & Webb, SD, eds. 1985, Te great american biotic interchange. Plenum Press, Berlin.
Wikipedia 2015, ‘Geologic time scale,’                                                              ‘Phylogenetic tree,’             ‘Olenoides,’              ‘Devonian,’
‘Carboniferous,’ ‘Paleo-Tethys Ocean,’ ‘Jurassic,’ ‘Cretaceous,’ ‘Eocene,’ ‘Miocene,’ ‘Pliocene,’
‘Milutin Milanković,’ ‘Pleistocene’ https://en.wikipedia.org/
Woodburne, MO 2010, ‘Te great American biotic interchange: dispersals, tectonics, climate,
sea level and holding pens’, Journal of Mammalian Evolution, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 245-264.
Zachos, J, Pagani, M, Sloan, L, Tomas, E & Billups, K 2001, ‘Trends, rhythms, and aberrations
in global climate 65 Ma to present’, Science, vol. 292, no. 5517, pp. 686-693.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
137

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
8   HUMAN EVOLUTION
AND BIOGEOGRAPHY
Your goals for this chapter are to learn about:
• Te major species comprising the human evolutionary tree
• Early agriculture and animal domestication
• Possible geographic factors that underlie human inequality
• Te Anthropocene
• Measuring human impacts
• Extinctions
• Te Columbian Exchange
• Exotic and invasive species
• Anthropogenic climate change
8.1                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION
Modern humans and our precursors have existed for millions of years. From our humble
beginnings after splitting from the chimpanzees in Africa roughly 7 MYA, the human lineage
has produced a highly branched evolutionary tree of more than 2 dozen species. But now only
one remains: Homo sapiens, a species that has developed the capability to transform the world.
In this chapter, we will briefly review the major events in the history of human evolution and
biogeography, and discuss the ecological impacts that H. sapiens have had on the planet’s biota.
8.2                                                                                                 HUMAN EVOLUTION
Understandably, there is great interest in our own branch of the evolutionary tree, and the study
of human evolution is a vibrant and exciting field. Our understanding of human phylogeny
has historically been based primarily on the fossil record, but more recently, molecular biology
and DNA analysis have played increasingly important roles. Even so, reconstruction of human
phylogeny is often based on incomplete evidence. Consequently, our views of human phylogeny
are frequently being revised as more evidence comes to light. Figure 8.1 shows a phylogeny of
humans that includes the genera and species discussed in this chapter. Temporal ranges given
for periods when human ancestors lived are, of necessity, rough estimates.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
138

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
Figure 8.1: A phylogeny of humans, focusing on groups discussed in this chapter.
(Modified from http://www.amnh.org/education/resources/rfl/web/hhoguide/family-tree.html;
Attribution: Shawn Meagher, Western Illinois University)
Based on available evidence, H. sapiens (“wise man”) arose about 200,000 years ago in Africa.
Homo sapiens is the most recent in a long lineage that may have begun around 7 MYA ago
with Sahelanthropus tchadensis, possibly the common ancestor of humans and the genus Pan
(chimpanzees and bonobos), although this is far from settled. In S. tchadensis the foramen
magnum (the opening of the skull where the spinal cord exits) is located underneath the skull,
indicative of bipedal locomotion, although this interpretation is under dispute. In apes, this
opening is located more posteriorly, reflecting a more quadrupedal locomotion. Te Genus
Homo is in only genus in the subtribe Hominina of the tribe Hominini, which, in addition,
includes the subtribes Australopithicina (Australopithecus and closely related genera) and Panina
(with the one genus, Pan). Te Hominini that arose after separation from the chimpanzees
(i.e., the subtribes Hominina and Australopithicina) are collectively referred to as hominins,
or the “human clade.”
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
139

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Human Evolution and Biogeography
Orrorin tugenensis is a contender along with S. tchadensis for the title of earliest human. Orrorin
tugenensis had microdont dentition (small teeth) reminiscent of humans, but with canines that
are ape-like, but reduced. Specimens of this species have been dated from around 6 MYA.
Orrorin tugenensis was probably a tree-climber, but also perhaps bipedal to some extent. If
O. tugenensis is indeed an early part of the human lineage, then the Australopithecina, which
occurred later, were side branches from this main human line. But again, this is under debate.
Genera of Australopithecina include Ardipithecus (6.0 to 4.4 MYA), Australopithecus (4 to 2
MYA), and Paranthropus (2.7 to 1.2 MYA). Te best known species in the genus Ardipithecus,
A. ramidus, was about 1.2 m tall. Based on pelvis and limb structure, Ardipithecus may have
been facultatively bipedal, that is, bipedal when moving along the ground, but using all four
limbs when moving in the trees. Its bipedal locomotion was primitive and inefficient compared
to later hominins, and its brain size was only about 300-350 cm3, or about 25 to 30% that
of modern H. sapiens.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
140

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Human Evolution and Biogeography
Te genus Australopithecus appeared later, around 4 MYA, and over the course of a couple
of million years would be represented by several species. Australopithecus afarensis (Fig. 8.2)
is probably the best known species, and is represented in the fossil record by the well-known
partial skeleton named “Lucy.” Sexual dimorphism in Australopithecus was substantial; males
were about 1.5 m tall, and females about a half meter shorter. Anatomical evidence and
footprints preserved in volcanic ash in Tanzania indicate that Australopithecus were bipedal.
Compared with A. afarensis, Australopithecus africanus appears to have pelvic structure better
suited for efficient bipedalism. Australopithecus brain size was significantly greater than that
of Ardipithecus, but still relatively small, measuring about 425 cm3, or about 35% that of
modern humans. Te small brain coupled with bipedal locomotion has cast doubt on the
long-held view that increased brain size preceded bipedalism in human evolution. Based on
dental microwear and trace element studies, Australopithecus apparently ate primarily fruits,
vegetables, and tubers, probably supplemented with meat. Fossils of butchered animal bones
associated with Australopithecus sites also suggest meat-eating, as well as early tool use, dating
about 3.4 MYA.
Figure 8.2: A reconstruction of a female Australopithecus afarensis.
(Wikipedia ‘Australopithecus afarensis;’ Source unknown)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
141

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
Paranthropus are also known as “robust austalopithecines.” Tey probably descended from
Australopithecus. Some paleontologists think that A. africanus evolved into Paranthropus, and
Paranthropus species are sometimes included in the genus Australopithecus. Paranthropus were
around 1.3 m tall, with males somewhat taller and larger than females. Paranthropus were
generally stouter than Australopithecus, and had more robust cranial anatomy. Te brain of
Paranthropus was larger than that of Australopithecus. Tere is evidence that Paranthropus used
tools, perhaps to a greater extent than did Australopithecus. Like Australopithecus, Paranthropus
was bipedal. Te diet of Paranthropus boisei appears to have been based to a great extent on
C4 plants such as grasses and sedges, which would have been plentiful in the open savanna
habitats in which P. boisei lived. Paranthropus overlapped with the earliest members of the
genus Homo, Homo habilis, and may have coexisted with other Homo species as well. But
Paranthropus went extinct about 1.2 MYA, whereas Homo survived and flourished. Perhaps
the more specialized diet and less advanced tool use of Paranthropus led to their demise.
Challenge the way we run
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
RUN FASTER.
RUN LONGER..
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
RUN EASIER…
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
142

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Human Evolution and Biogeography
Te genus Homo first appeared in Africa about 2.1 MYA, with Homo habilis (Fig. 8.3) as its
earliest representative. Among species in the genus Homo, H. habilis is the least similar to
modern humans, with some ape-like features such as relatively long arms and forward-jutting
jaws. Homo habilis were small compared to later Homo, with a height of about 1.25 m. Some
paleontologists have suggested that H. habilis is more appropriately included in the genus
Australopithecus. However, H. habilis had a brain roughly 50% larger than Australopithecus,
though still less than half that of modern humans. Homo habilis used stone flake tools, probably
for cutting meat from carrion rather than for active hunting or defense. Fossil evidence
indicates that H. habilis frequently fell victim to large predators such as the saber-toothed
cat, Dinofelis. Homo habilis was probably not the first human tool user; evidence suggests that
Australopithecus had used tools previously, and Paranthropus used tools as well. But H. habilis
may have been the first tool makers.
Figure 8.3: A reconstruction of Homo habilis. (Wikipedia ‘Homo habilis;’
Attribution: Photographed at Westfälisches Museum für Archäologie,
Herne, by Lillyundfreya)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
143

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Human Evolution and Biogeography
Homo habilis persisted until about 1.5 MYA, and thus coexisted with another human species,
Homo erectus (Fig. 8.4), which first appeared about 1.9 MYA. Te relationship between
these two species is still being debated. Some paleontologists consider the two species to be
separate lines from a common ancestor, but others suggest that H. erectus was derived from
an isolated population of H. habilis, and the remainder of the latter species coexisted with H.
erectus for a few hundred thousand years. With an average height of about 1.7 m, H. erectus
was substantially taller than H. habilis, although there was a great deal of height and size
variation in H. erectus.
Figure 8.4: A reconstruction of a Homo erectus skeleton from Tautavel, France.
(Wikipedia ‘Homo erectus;’ Attribution: Gerbil)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
144

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
Compared to H. habilis, H. erectus had greater brain capacity as well, about ¾ the capacity
of modern humans. Te larger body size and brains of H. erectus required greater energy
inputs, and meat, being more easily digestible, played a greater role in the diet of H. erectus.
Tool making and use became more sophisticated than that found in H. habilis. However,
some paleontologists have recently suggested that several species of Homo that existed around
1.8 MYA, including H. habilis, Homo rudolfensis, Homo ergaster, and H. erectus, in reality
represent variation within a single species, best referred to as H. erectus. Homo erectus has the
distinction of being the longest surviving species of Homo, existing for over a million years
before becoming extinct. In comparison, H. sapiens have existed for roughly 200,000 years.
During their time, H. erectus became quite widespread; fossils have been found in Africa,
Eurasia, Indonesia, China, and Southeast Asia.
This e-book
is made with
SETASIGN
SetaPDF
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
145

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Human Evolution and Biogeography
Homo heidelbergensis (Fig. 8.5) is a relatively recent human species, first appearing about
600,000 years ago. Homo heidelbergensis were larger in both body size (about 1.75 m and
1.57 m in height for males and females, respectively) and brain case volume (1100 to 1400
cm3) than previous Homo species. Tese measurements substantially overlapped the ranges
of modern humans in both respects. Homo heidelbergensis were the first humans to inhabit
cold climates in substantial numbers, and their compact body forms were an adaptation that
increased heat retention due to reduction in surface area-to-volume ratio. Homo heidelbergensis
were innovative in many ways. Tey were the first humans to use controlled fire, and also
used wooden spears to hunt large game. Tey were also the first to build shelters, using wood
and rocks.
Figure 8.5: A reconstruction of Homo heidelbergensis. (Wikipedia ‘Homo
heidelbergensis;’ Attribution: Jose Luis Martinez Alvarez from Asturias, España)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
146

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
It is thought that separate branches of the H. heidelbergensis lineage gave rise to H. sapiens as
well as “Neanderthal man.” Some paleontologists consider Neanderthals to be a subspecies of
H. sapiens, Homo sapiens neanderthalensis. However, most consider them to be a separate species,
Homo neanderthalensis (Fig. 8.6). Tere was substantial overlap between H. neanderthalensis
and H. sapiens temporally, and the two species coexisted in Europe for about 5,000 years
after the arrival of H. sapiens there. In terms of body size, H. neanderthalensis was similar
to H. heidelbergensis, but somewhat shorter and stouter, again reflecting adaption for heat
conservation in cold climates. Homo neanderthalensis had large brains; as large as or larger than
that of modern H. sapiens. H. neanderthalensis took the behaviors found in H. heidelbergensis
to new levels of sophistication. Homo neanderthalensis made and used a variety of complex
tools; they constructed shelters, made clothing, and engaged in symbolic behaviors such as
burying their dead and marking graves with objects such as flowers. Homo neanderthalensis
were accomplished hunters and, like H. heidelbergensis, incorporated meat into their diet,
particularly during the winter when plant foods were scarce. Te diet of H. neanderthalensis
often included large, dangerous game; frequent bone fractures in H. neanderthalensis attest
to this.
Figure 8.6: Skeleton and reconstruction of a Neanderthal man.
(Wikipedia ‘Neanderthal;’ Attribution: Photaro)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
147

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
Homo neanderthalensis disappeared about 30,000 years ago, soon after the arrival of H. sapiens in
Europe. What caused the demise of H. neanderthalensis? Several hypotheses have been proposed,
some of which invoke direct or indirect interactions with H. sapiens. One suggestion is that
H. neanderthalensis was unable to compete for food and resources effectively with H. sapiens,
perhaps because their short, stout limbs did not allow H. neanderthalensis to move as effectively
as H. sapiens. UCLA biologist Jared Diamond has proposed that anatomical factors limited
the ability of H. neanderthalensis to produce complex speech and communicate effectively in
comparison to H. sapiens. Diamond has also suggested that direct conflict between the two
species could have resulted in violence and genocide of H. neanderthalensis. Some have also
suggested that H. sapiens may have hunted and eaten H. neanderthalensis. Homo sapiens may
have also contributed to the extinction of H. neanderthalensis by transmitting pathogens or
parasites which were new to H. neanderthalensis and to which H. neanderthalensis therefore
had little immunity. It is also possible that H. neanderthalensis was poorly equipped to survive
climate change that was occurring at the time. Certainly these potential causes are not mutually
exclusive, and it is quite possible that a combination of these or other factors may have led to
the extinction of H. neanderthalensis. However, there is some genetic evidence of interbreeding
between H. neanderthalensis and H. sapiens, meaning that H. neanderthalensis genes may still
persist in modern humans. Homo neanderthalensis and H. heidelbergensis, along with another
species, Homo rhodesiensis, are generally referred to as “archaic humans,” anatomically distinct
from H. sapiens.
Free eBook on
Learning & Development
By the Chief Learning Officer of McKinsey
Download Now
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
148

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Human Evolution and Biogeography
Te origins of modern H. sapiens have been debated for decades, but recent evidence supports
the “recent single-origin hypothesis” (otherwise known as the “out of Africa” hypothesis). In
this view, supported by genetic and fossil evidence, H. sapiens evolved from archaic humans
solely in Africa between 200,000 and 60,000 years ago. One group of H. sapiens left Africa
between 125,000 and 60,000 years ago, and over time displaced other species in the genus
Homo in other geographic locations. A competing hypothesis, the “multiregional hypothesis,”
asserts that one continuous human species, which includes archaic humans as well as H. sapiens,
evolved throughout the world into the various geographic populations of H. sapiens. Tis
hypothesis currently has much less support in the paleoanthropological community than
does the recent single-origin hypothesis. By 30,000 years ago, Homo sapiens had spread from
Africa to Europe, Asia, and the Australasian region. Approximately 15,000 years ago, during
the late Wisconsinan Glaciation, low sea levels exposed the Bering Land Bridge, allowing
colonization of the Americas from Asia.
About 13,000-12,000 years ago, the North American megafauna underwent large-scale
extinctions, a pattern that had occurred during earlier time periods in other parts of the world.
Tese extinctions may have had multiple causes. Climate change may have been an important
factor. However, evidence suggests that, in several locations, these extinctions correlate closely
with the arrival of humans, and the animals that went extinct were large herbivores or flightless
birds that would likely have been the focus of human hunting. Te idea that humans were
responsible for megafaunal extinctions is known as the Pleistocene overkill hypothesis.
In addition to those species discussed in this section, the human clade has included numerous
others that have entered and exited the human evolutionary stage over the last 7 million years.
See the works listed at the end of the chapter for more information on these.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
149

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Human Evolution and Biogeography
8.3                                                                                                AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL DOMESTICATION
One of the seminal events in human history is the domestication of certain animals and
plants. In her recent paper on the relationship between humans and domesticated plants
and animals, Melinda Zeder defined domestication as follows: “Domestication is a sustained
multigenerational, mutualistic relationship in which one organism assumes a significant
degree of influence over the reproduction and care of another organism in order to secure a
more predictable supply of a resource of interest, and through which the partner organism
gains advantage over individuals that remain outside this relationship, thereby benefitting
and often increasing the fitness of both the domesticator and the target domesticate.” As this
definition points out, domestication can be viewed as a mutualistic relationship, benefiting
both partners. When we began to selectively breed particular individuals with certain traits,
humans were, at a fundamental level, changing allele frequencies, and thus causing evolution,
in food animals and plants. Tis process is now known as artificial selection. Tousands of
years after the beginnings of domestication, Charles Darwin used this selection by humans as
an analogy for how certain alleles are best able to survive and flourish in natural populations.
He called this mechanism of evolution “natural selection.”
Somewhat surprisingly to many, human domestication of animals appears to have preceded
plant domestication. Tere is disagreement on the exact date, but molecular genetic evidence
suggests that the modern dog diverged from wolves at least 40,000 years ago which, presumably,
corresponds to the timing of dog domestication. Other animals were domesticated much later.
Pigs were domesticated roughly 15,000 years ago, sheep and goats about 12,000 years ago,
and cattle around 10,000 to 11,000 years ago.
Until recently, the earliest evidence of plant domestication was thought to be about 10,000
to 12,000 years ago, in the form of wheat and barley cultivation. Tis took place in the area
known as the “Fertile Crescent,” or Mesopotamia, the region that includes present-day Iraq,
Kuwait, and parts of Iran, Turkey, and Syria (Fig. 8.7). However, recent studies done by Ainit
Snir and colleagues at the Ohalo II site on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, Israel provide
evidence of agricultural cultivation 23,000 years ago.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
150

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Human Evolution and Biogeography
Figure 8.7: The Fertile Crescent. (Wikipedia ‘Fertile Crescent;’ Attribution: Nafsadh)
Many of our domesticated crops are the descendants of “weedy” species that colonize and grow
well in disturbed soils. Tere is archaeological evidence from over 20,000 years ago of dough
made from wild wheat, barley, and other grass species. It would have been a relatively small
leap from taking advantage of these wild plants for food, to collecting and storing their seeds
and then distributing them in soil previously disturbed for this purpose. Of course, variation
in these plants meant that some had more desirable characteristics than others, and in time
people learned to select for desirable traits. Other plants, such as pea, beans, alfalfa, and lentil
were also domesticated in Mesopotamia. Centers of agriculture in other geographic regions
developed a bit later - in China and the Americas beginning about 8,000 years ago, and
Africa beginning about 7,000 years ago. However, there is some evidence of taro cultivation
in Papua New Guinea almost 30,000 years ago, which would make this plant the first in the
world to be cultivated.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
151

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Human Evolution and Biogeography
Te Agricultural Revolution, also known as the Neolithic Demographic Transition or the
Neolithic Revolution, marked the transition of human populations from primarily scattered,
hunter-gatherer societies to larger, more concentrated groups. Tis resulted from high agricultural
productivity which produced enough food to support denser populations. Humans became less
nomadic, and food surpluses made it possible for some people to work at non-food production
activities, allowing better development of a variety of skills and new technologies. Tis led to
a greater degree of specialization and to more organized, hierarchical societies.
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent
the wheel we reinvent
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new
markets provide both opportunities and challenges.
An environment in which your expertise is in high
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere
within our global group and benefit from international
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing
light every day.
Light is OSRAM
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
152

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Human Evolution and Biogeography
Te standard view is that the development of agriculture marked the beginning of a dramatic
increase in the quality of human life. After all, plentiful food could now be had without all the
hard work associated with hunting game and gathering plant foods. But recently, some have
begun to question the accuracy of this view. Evidence now suggests that hunter-gatherers can
meet their food requirements in fewer work hours than can agriculturalists. Agriculturalists’
diets are also apparently less balanced and of lower quality than that of hunter-gatherers.
Evidence shows that the stature of early Europeans after the change to agriculture decreased by
4 to 5 inches, from 5'10" (men) and 5'6" (women) to 5'5" and 5'1", respectively. Agriculture
led to the development of vitamin deficiencies and teeth and bone problems. Te close
association with their domesticated animals also led to spread of diseases such as measles,
influenza, smallpox, tapeworms, and Trichinella from animals to humans. Living a sedentary
lifestyle in close proximity to their own feces also led to increased prevalence of parasites such
as hookworms and other intestinal roundworms. Some have argued that the development of
agriculture led to change from more egalitarian hunter-gatherer societies to highly stratified
societies with concentration of wealth and power in a few hands, and high levels of inequality.
Te above deficiencies of agriculturally-based diets generally applied only to the poor and
working class; the smaller number of wealthy, non-producing elites of the agricultural world
were much healthier. Many of the problems associated with agrarian societies were reviewed
by Jared Diamond in a 1987 Discover magazine article descriptively titled “Te Worst Mistake
in the History of the Human Race.”
Whatever the costs and benefits of the agricultural way of life, the development of agriculture
inevitably led to the displacement of hunter-gatherer societies. Te large, concentrated
populations associated with agrarian societies have, to a great extent, pushed their hunter-
gather counterparts aside, and agriculture has overwhelmingly shaped the pathway that
humanity has taken. Tat pathway has led to dramatic inequalities among human societies.
In particular, Eurasian societies have come to gain hegemonic dominance over the modern
world. Some ascribe this dominance to superior intelligence, talent, skill, or morality. But in
his Pulitzer Prize-winning book Guns, Germs, and Steel: Te Fates of Human Societies, Jared
Diamond proposed a controversial new hypothesis to explain the roots of these inequalities.
Diamond asserts that these inequalities are best explained by fundamental geographic and
environmental differences rather than inherent Eurasian superiority.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
153

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                     Human Evolution and Biogeography
Diamond argues that Eurasian success has been due, to a great extent, to the geographic “luck
of the draw.” With the rise of agriculture, Eurasians possessed early advantages in the availability
of large numbers of plants and animals suitable for domestication. Eurasians had food plants
such as wheat, barley, and edible legumes that were relatively nutrient rich, and easier to plant
and cultivate than food plants in other regions of the world. Similarly, Eurasians had large
numbers of animals such as sheep, goats, and cattle that had suitable behaviors, diets, and
growth rates for domestication. Large mammals in particular are useful, not only for food, but
in providing muscle power as beasts of burden. Diamond lists 14 large mammals worldwide
that have been domesticated; of these all but two are descendants of wild species found in
Eurasia, including the five most useful - sheep, goats, cows, pigs, and horses. Eurasia’s long
east-west axis was also advantageous in that it increased the likelihood of domesticated plants
and animals from one location being well suited for other locations with similar latitudes and
climates. Tese advantages in numbers of species suitable for domestication would translate
into large advantages in food production, division of labor, long distance transport of materials,
and economic and military superiority. Tis in turn would lead to the development of powerful
nation-states and empires that would come to dominate most of the world.
360°
thinking.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers                                                          © Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
154

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
Te Eurasian advantage in animal domestication would have other ramifications as well. Teir
long, close association with domesticated animals meant that Eurasians had long exposure to
a variety of parasites and pathogens, to which they evolved some immunity. When Europeans
invaded the New World, they carried some of these pathogens with them. Te indigenous
people had never been exposed to these diseases, and had little immunity to them. Te most
devastating of these diseases was smallpox, but other diseases such as measles, cholera, and
influenza caused many deaths as well. Te number of indigenous people in the New World
before the arrival of Europeans is unclear; estimates range from about 10 million to 100 million
or more. After European contact, this number declined by 70 to 90%, mostly due to disease.
Diamond makes compelling arguments for the importance of geographic determinism in
explaining the roots of human inequality. However, counterarguments can be made as well.
Tere are exceptions to Diamond’s examples; geographic locations where the conditions for
agricultural development were excellent, but intensive agriculture never developed, and cultures
that did develop efficient agriculture but still remained poor. Tere are many factors in addition
to geography that can play a role in the development of societies, and the relationship between
human success and their geographic setting is not a one-way street; humans are adaptable,
and capable of altering their surroundings to suit their purposes.
8.4                                                                                                 THE ANTHROPOCENE
Since the advent of agriculture, Homo sapiens have altered the face of the Earth in a dramatic
and accelerating fashion. Te impact of human activities has been so great, that some scientists
have asserted that we are now in a new geological epoch, the Anthropocene, although this has
not yet been formally adopted by the geological community. Te concept of an Anthropocene
Epoch was popularized by atmospheric chemist Paul Crutzen and biologist Eugene Stoermer,
and many scientists are using the term.
Debate has ensued regarding the official beginning of this epoch. Crutzen and Stoermer
suggested the late 18th century, when James Watt’s improvement of the steam engine was an
important factor in the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution. Others have suggested the
birth of agriculture as an appropriate beginning of the epoch. In order to define a geological
time unit, geological stratigraphic material must contain a record of global-scale synchronous
change. Several potential start dates/events have been proposed, ranging from the megafaunal
extinctions that began roughly 50,000 years ago, to the origins of agriculture, to the presence
of persistent industrial chemicals beginning about 1950.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
155

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
In a recent paper in the prestigious journal Nature, Lewis and Maslin suggest that the above
proposed start dates generally do not exhibit markers of sufficient global synchrony to be
useful. Tey have proposed two potential start dates for the Anthropocene that do appear to
meet this criterion - 1610 and 1964. Te year 1610 marks a dramatic decrease in the amount
of CO2 in the atmosphere, and this appears to correspond to the precipitous (~ 90%) decline
in the indigenous human population of the New World after the arrival of Europeans. Tis
decline in the population of the New World, caused by disease, famine, and war, resulted in a
significant decline in farming and the use of fire, which allowed regeneration of over 50 million
ha of native vegetation. Tis increased vegetation in turn resulted in increased carbon uptake
and the decline in global atmospheric CO2. Tis date also corresponds to the beginnings of
significant transoceanic movement of species. Te 1964 date corresponds to peak levels of
14C associated with radioactive fallout from nuclear bomb tests. With respect to early human
evolution, an important question is “how did the geography of the Earth affect humans?”
Now, an equally legitimate question is “how are humans affecting the Earth?” Regardless of
the start date chosen for the beginning of the Anthropocene, there can be no doubt that H.
sapiens is now the most important biological agent of change on Earth, and collectively we
are changing the landscape, climate, and biodiversity of our planet in profound ways.
Te sum total of human impacts on the Earth is a function of human population size and
the degree of impact per individual. During the last 10,000 years, the human population has
increased from a few million individuals to over 7 billion as of the year 2011. Population
growth is expected to continue for decades, although at a decreasing rate, and is expected
to reach 10 billion in the late 21st century. Tus, the human population has increased over
1,000-fold in the last 10,000 years. However, this tremendous growth has not been uniform
over time. For most of this time period, growth was relatively slow, and there were even
periods of population decline, such as the substantial dip in the 14th century due to the “black
death.” But in the last few centuries, the population has grown virtually exponentially; in the
20th century alone, the world human population increased by over 5 billion. Tis population
growth has resulted in a corresponding increase in human impacts on the Earth.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
156

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Human Evolution and Biogeography
However, population size is not the complete story. Individuals vary greatly in their capacity
to change the Earth. One commonly used measure that depicts individual impacts on the
Earth is the ecological footprint. Tis metric represents the area of productive land and
sea that is required to supply the resources and absorb the wastes of a human population.
Currently, the world human population has an ecological footprint that would require 1.5
Earths to supply the resources and assimilate the wastes of the current human population
indefinitely. It is estimated that a sustainable level of ecological footprint would be 2.1 ha
per person at our current population size, but that overall, the human population currently
exceeds this by a wide margin. Obviously, this level of consumption and waste production
is not sustainable. But examining this ecological footprint in more detail, we see that its size
varies tremendously from country to country. Te United States and certain European, Asian,
and Middle Eastern countries have ecological footprints of 6 ha per person or higher, whereas
countries such as India, Haiti, and many African countries have ecological footprints below
1 ha per person (Fig. 8.8).
We will turn your CV into
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
Send us your CV on
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
www.employerforlife.com
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
157

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Human Evolution and Biogeography
Figure 8.8: World map of countries, showing their per capita ecological footprint.
(Wikipedia ‘List of countries by ecological footprint;’ Attribution: Jolly Janner)
Not surprisingly, there is a high correlation between ecological footprint and quality of life,
and billions of people in poorer countries aspire to the lifestyle (and consumption levels) of
the richest countries. While it may seem to be morally just, elevation of the entire world
to the level of consumption of the richest countries would be ecologically disastrous. But
it is possible to have a fairly high quality of life with a relatively low ecological footprint.
Fig. 8.9 shows the ecological footprints and human development index values for countries
in different regions of the world. Te human development index combines three factors (life
expectancy, educational level, and income) to derive a measure of quality of life. As the upper
left region of the graph shows, some countries are succeeding in achieving a relatively high
human development index while still maintaining a low ecological footprint. Cuba and several
other Latin American/Caribbean countries fall into this category, as well as some countries
in other regions of the world. However, other countries have similar quality of life (human
development index), but with much higher environmental impacts (ecological footprint). Tese
latter countries might benefit from an examination of what the countries with lower ecological
impacts are doing right. In addition to population control, decreased consumption by the
wealthier countries with large ecological footprints is essential to a sustainable global human
population, but there are immense political obstacles to overcome in order to achieve this.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
158

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
Figure 8.9: Ecological footprint for different nations compared to their human development index.
(Wikipedia ‘Ecological footprint;’ Attribution: Travelplanner based on data from UN Development
Programme and Global Footprint Network)
8.5                                                                                                 HUMAN IMPACTS ON OTHER SPECIES
As we have seen, humans and our activities have had immense impacts on the rest of the
biological world. In geological history, there have been five extinction events that biologists
consider “mass extinctions.” Te Permian-Triassic extinction event and the Cretaceous-Paleogene
extinction event that included the non-avian dinosaurs are probably the two most well-known.
Te recent Holocene (or Anthropocene) has seen extinction levels that many biologists consider
to be the 6th mass extinction. Te Holocene extinction rate has been estimated at 140,000
species per year, with most of those being undocumented.
Tese extinctions include such recent and well known ones as the flightless dodo of the island
of Mauritius, the thylacine of Tasmania, Australia, and New Guinea, and the passenger pigeon
of North America. Te dodo was driven to extinction in the late 17th century, apparently
through a combination of habitat loss, mortality caused by introduced animals that plundered
dodo nests, and human hunting. Te thylacine (Fig. 8.10), also known as the Tasmanian wolf
or Tasmanian tiger, was officially considered extinct in 1936, when the last captive specimen
died at the Beaumaris Zoo in Hobart, Tasmania. Te passenger pigeon was probably the most
abundant bird in North America, with numbers estimated at up to 5 billion at the time of
European arrival. Te bird was driven to extinction by hunting and loss of habitat; the last
individual died at the Cincinnati Zoo in 1914.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
159

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                         Human Evolution and Biogeography
Figure 8.10: Thylacines in Washington DC, USA, 1906.
(Wikipedia ‘Thylacine;’ Attribution: Baker; E.J. Keller)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
160

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                    Human Evolution and Biogeography
For every high-profile extinction such as these, countless species have disappeared before they
were even known to science. For most of human history, our primitive hunting abilities and
small numbers probably made the impacts of our hunting on other species negligible. But
as we have seen, by the Pleistocene, human hunting capabilities had advanced to the point
that it probably played a role in the Pleistocene megafaunal extinctions. Modern human
hunting on an individual basis is regulated in many countries, and this can allow sustainable
harvesting of wild game. However, on a large-scale, commercial level, human predation on
other species of animals has reached a level that, according to a recent study by Chris Darimont
and colleagues, now makes H. sapiens a “super predator,” with the ability to cause mortality
rates far in excess of those caused by non-human predators. For example, humans kill adult
reproductive members of prey species at rates up to 14 times higher than do other predators;
terrestrial carnivores and fishes are exploited especially intensely. Tis level of exploitation
reflects both the hyper-efficiency of many human harvesting technologies as well as the
demands of feeding the large and highly consumptive human population. Of course, these
human hunting pressures affect not only the species being harvested, but other species in the
food web that depend on them.
Since the beginnings of agriculture, H. sapiens have transformed the Earth’s landscape.
Tis transformation has undoubtedly been the most important source of anthropogenic
extinctions. Over the last few centuries, this transformation has occurred in an accelerating
fashion, due both to our increasing population and our increased technological abilities to
alter the landscape. Columbus’ 1492 voyage to the New World marked the beginning of a
large-scale exchange of plants, animals, people, and technology between the Old and New
Worlds, often referred to as the Columbian Exchange. One result of this exchange was the
growth of Europe as an economic power; this would in time lead to colonialism and large-
scale establishment of exploitative plantation economies in which primary products such as
crops, timber, and extracted minerals would be produced using cheap (slave) labor in the
colonies and then exported to the home country where the materials would be processed and
re-exported at a large profit.
From a land-use standpoint in the colonies, this system would result in large areas of forest being
cut and large areas of land being converted to agriculture with, of course, an accompanying
loss of native biodiversity. Since then, of course, humankinds’ ability to alter the landscape
has dramatically increased in geographic scope and impact. In many parts of the world, such
as the Midwestern U.S.A. where I live, one would be hard-pressed to find even a few hectares
of contiguous land that does not show significant human impacts. Tis degradation and
fragmentation of landscapes has resulted in small islands of suitable habitat in an ocean of
agriculture and urbanization. As we saw in Chapter 6, smaller, more isolated oceanic islands
have lower species richness; this pattern applies to terrestrial habitat islands as well.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
161

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                       Human Evolution and Biogeography
As mentioned previously, the Columbian Exchange involved large-scale movement of species
between the Old World and New World, so introductions of exotic species are not a new
phenomenon. In many cases, these were economically important crops or domestic animals,
and the ecological damage associated with them was to a large extent a function of land-use
patterns in their new homes. Te terms exotic and invasive are sometimes used interchangeably,
but there is an important difference between the two. An exotic species, also known as an
introduced, alien, or non-native species, is one that has arrived at a location outside its native
geographic range, usually through human transport. Exotic species often, but not always,
become invasive species. An invasive species is a (usually) exotic species that tends to proliferate
and spread, causing ecological, economic, or even health-related harm.
Invasive species are often “r-strategists” rather than “K-strategists.” In ecology, these two concepts
relate to selection pressures for different life history traits. Species that are r-strategists can
quickly colonize new locations. Tey tend to be relatively small-bodied and short-lived, but
have rapid reproduction and growth. Offspring receive little or no parental care and have low
survival rates, but because so many are produced, large enough numbers still survive. Tese
species can disperse and spread rapidly. Tey are generally poor competitors, and depend on
exploitation of newly-available environments with less crowded ecological niches to perpetuate
themselves. Examples of r-strategists include ruderal or “weedy” plant species such as dandelions
and many grasses, many insects and other invertebrates, and, among the mammals, many
rodent species. K-strategists show the opposite traits (long-lived, slow reproduction but lots of
parental care, good competitors, etc.), and include many tree species, orchids, and mammals
such as primates and elephants. It is important to keep in mind that the r- vs. K-strategist
concept represents a continuum, and that both types of traits can sometimes be found in the
same species.
Tere are also other factors that can play a role in a species becoming invasive. If natural
enemies or competitors kept the exotic species in check in its native environment, the absence
of those species in the new environment can allow ecological release of the exotic species
populations, resulting in an invasive species. Likewise, an exotic species can become invasive
if an important limiting resource is more abundant in the new environment. Tere is also
evidence that many invasive species are capable of undergoing rapid evolution, allowing
them to quickly adapt to new environments. Islands and disturbed environments appear to
be particularly susceptible to invasive species, probably because of lack of effective natural
enemies and competitors, and greater availability of open ecological niches.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
162

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Human Evolution and Biogeography
Tere is abundant evidence that invasive species can drive down numbers of other species
and thus contribute to loss of biodiversity. On the western Pacific island of Guam, the
brown tree snake was accidently introduced from the Indonesian region sometime in the
late 1940s-early 1950s. Since then, this snake has created havoc, causing the extinction of
12 native bird species on Guam. Because of the greater abundance of food resources than in
its native environment, brown tree snakes have reached densities of 100 individuals per ha
on Guam. Plants can also be invasive exotics. Old man’s beard is a climbing vine that was
introduced as an ornamental plant in New Zealand in the early 1900s (Fig. 8.11). Te seeds
germinate most readily on disturbed ground. Once established, vines can cover trees and form
a dense canopy that prevents sunlight from reaching the ground. Tis adversely affects native
vegetation already present, as well as inhibiting germination of new individuals. In the Tierra
del Fuego region of extreme southern Argentina and Chile, introduced beavers are radically
changing the landscape and adversely affecting native species through their tree-felling and
dam-building habits. Tese beavers are descendants of ones evidently imported from Canada
by the Argentinian government in the 1940s in an attempt to establish a commercial fur trade.
Te beavers are now the focus of what may be the largest eradication project ever attempted,
but it now appears that control, rather than eradication, is a more realistic goal.
AXA Global
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
163

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                               Human Evolution and Biogeography
Figure 8.11: Old man’s beard (Clematis vitalba) smothering a New Zealand endemic, Cordyline
australis, on the Port Hills in Christchurch. (Wikipedia ‘Old man’s beard in New Zealand;’
Attribution: Alan Liefting)
8.6                                                                                              ANTHROPOGENIC CLIMATE CHANGE
Like any other species, humans have always affected, and in turn been affected by, their
environment. But with the dawn of agriculture, the ability of H. sapiens to alter the Earth
increased dramatically, and reached even greater levels during the Industrial Revolution,
which began in the mid- to late 1700s. Since that time, habitat destruction, invasive species
introductions, and extinctions have continued and accelerated. But in the last few decades
it has become increasingly apparent that industrialization is driving another and potentially
greater threat to the Earth’s biota - anthropogenic climate change or global warming. Certain
gases in the Earth’s atmosphere trap the sun’s radiation, preventing it from being reradiated,
a phenomenon known as the “greenhouse effect.” It is this greenhouse effect that keeps the
Earth’s temperature high enough to support life. But since the Industrial Revolution, fossil
fuel use has increased the amount of greenhouse gases, particularly CO2, in the atmosphere.
Evidence has increasingly pointed to this rise in greenhouse gas emissions (Fig. 8.12) as a
major factor in global climate change and an overall warming trend that has the potential to
cause catastrophic disruption of the Earth’s biosphere.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
164

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                               Human Evolution and Biogeography
Figure 8.12: Fossil fuel related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions over the 20th century.
(Wikipedia ‘Global warming;’ Attribution: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency)
Studies of the potential effects of increased atmospheric CO2 go back over a century. In
1896, Swedish physical chemist Svante Arrhenius suggested, and attempted to calculate, how
changes in atmospheric CO2 levels could affect temperatures at the Earth’s surface via the
greenhouse effect. While the details of his predictions were inaccurate, Arrhenius was one of
the earliest scientists to show that the possibility of anthropogenic global warming should be
taken seriously.
Debate among climate scientists regarding the potential role of atmospheric gases in climatic
change continued throughout the 20th century. By the early 1970s, it was apparent that
aerosols were increasing in the atmosphere, but there was disagreement regarding whether
these increased aerosols would likely result in global warming or cooling. Although the
scientists who predicted cooling were a small minority, their views were exaggerated by the
mainstream media. By the 1980s, it was becoming increasingly clear that any cooling effect
that might result from atmospheric aerosols would be negligible compared to the heating
of the Earth’s climate due to atmospheric CO2 levels. Climate models indicated a positive
relationship between atmospheric CO2 and global temperatures. In 1985, a Franco-Soviet
study of Antarctic ice cores, led by Claude Lorius, showed that past temperatures and CO2
levels had tracked each other closely, providing important evidence for a CO2-temperature
relationship independent of computer climate models.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
165

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                Human Evolution and Biogeography
In 1988, the United Nations established the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). Te IPCC periodically issues reports on the state of scientific knowledge regarding
climate change. Te first report was issued in 1990, with subsequent reports every 5 to 7
years. Te fifth and most recent IPCC assessment report was issued in 2014. Te reports have
reflected increasing concern and certainty among climate scientists regarding climate change
and humanity’s role in causing it. Te fifth report states that the influence of humans on the
Earth’s climate is clear, with a very high (≥ 95%) probability that human influence was the
dominant cause of the dramatic global warming trend between 1951 and 2010 (Fig. 8.13).
Furthermore, without new policies to address climate change, the report projects an increase
in global mean temperature of 3.7 to 4.8°C by the year 2100, relative to pre-industrial levels.
It appears unlikely that some level of global warming can be avoided at this point. Te fifth
IPCC report indicates that if pledges made at the 2010 United Nations Climate Change
Conference are met, then there is likely a chance of limiting this temperature increase to
below 3.0°C by 2100.
e Graduate Programme
I joined MITAS because
for Engineers and Geoscientists
I wanted real responsibili                                                                        www.discovermitas.com
Month 16
a construction                                                                                    I was
supervisor in
the North Sea
advising and
                                                                                                  Real work                          helping foremen
International                                                                                     opportunities
ree work placements                                                                                                                  solve problems
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
166

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                   Human Evolution and Biogeography
Figure 8.13: Global mean surface temperature change from 1880 to 2015, relative to the 1951-
1980 mean. The black line is the annual mean and the red line is the 5-year running mean.
(Wikipedia ‘Global warming;’ Attribution: U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration)
Tese changes in climate will have a variety of impacts on the Earth’s biota. At the biome level,
ecologist Wilfried Tuiller has calculated that, for each 1°C change in global temperature, the
world’s biomes will shift about 160 km in latitude. So, for the above predicted temperature
changes, the world’s biomes would shift roughly 500 km to 750 km northward, assuming
other factors such as soil type are not limiting. Of course, individual species will vary in their
responses to climate change, depending on their physiological tolerances and the responses
of other organisms on which they depend. An example of the latter has been documented by
Nicole Miller-Struttmann and colleagues for alpine bumble bees on three peaks in the Rocky
Mountains of Colorado, USA. Bumble bee species and communities there have undergone
decreases in tongue length over the past few decades, probably as a result of decreases in
the availability of floral resources due to the warmer summers. Specialist long-tongue bees
have declined at the expense of the favored generalist short-tongue bees, and this has led to
a mismatch between the shorter-tongued bees and the longer-tubed plants that they once
pollinated. Te differential response of species to climate change could result in the severing
of ecological linkages such as pollination, seed dispersal, and parasitism.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
167

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                  Human Evolution and Biogeography
Climate change will likely have dramatic impacts on the biogeography of infectious diseases as
well. Higher temperatures and associated extreme weather events will cause greater flooding and
increased habitat for disease vectors such as mosquitoes that breed in aquatic habitats. Higher
temperatures will also mean faster developmental rates of these insects, as well as increased
geographic and altitudinal ranges in some species. Tis means that mosquito-borne diseases
such as malaria and dengue virus that have been considered primarily tropical diseases could
become established in areas where they previously have not occurred or have been eradicated.
Tis is a particularly dangerous situation because most people in these locations would have low
levels of immunity and little experience with the diseases. Te abundance and distributions of
other important disease vectors such as ticks, black flies, and lice will probably be affected as
well, in some cases unpredictably. Climate change could also increase the impacts of infectious
diseases indirectly if extreme weather events and disruptions of agricultural systems cause
food shortages, since malnourished individuals are more susceptible to the effects of disease.
As human activities change the Earth’s landscape and ecological systems, biogeographers
will be called upon to predict the likely impacts of these changes on the planet’s biota, and
to provide expert guidance in mitigating the adverse effects of these impacts. Te science of
biogeography promises to be at the forefront as humanity and the living things with which
we share the planet face a challenging future.
8.7                                                                                                 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Cox, CB & Moore, PD 2010, Biogeography: an ecological and evolutionary approach, 8th edn.
John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Darimont, CT, Fox, CH, Bryan, HM & Reimchen, TE 2015, ‘Te unique ecology of human
predators’, Science, vol. 349, no. 6250, pp. 858-860.
Davis, MA 2009, Invasion biology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, England.
Diamond, J 1987, ‘Te worst mistake in the history of the human race’, Discover Magazine,
May Issue, pp. 95-98.
Diamond, J 2005, Guns, germs, and steel: the fates of human societies. W.W. Norton & Company,
New York.
Johanson, D & Wong, K 2009, Lucy’s legacy: the quest for human origins. Broadway Books,
New York.
Lewis, SL & Maslin, MA 2015, ‘Defining the Anthropocene’, Nature, vol. 519, pp.171-180.
Lorius, C, Ritz, C, Jouzel, J, Merlivat, L & Barkov, NI 1985, ‘A 150,000-year climatic record
from Antarctic ice’, Nature, vol. 316, pp. 591-596.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
168

BIOGEOGRAPHY: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION                                                                 Human Evolution and Biogeography
Miller-Struttmann, NE, Geib, JC, Franklin, JD, Kevan, PG, Holdo, RM, Ebert-May, D, Lynn,
AM, Kettenbach, JA, Hedrick, E & Galen, C 2015, ‘Functional mismatch in a bumble bee
pollination mutualism under climate change’, Science, vol. 349, no. 6255, pp. 1541-1544.
Snir, A, Nadel, D, Groman-Yaroslavski, I, Melamed, Y, Sternberg, M, Bar-Yosef, O & Weiss,
E 2015, ‘Te origin of cultivation and proto-weeds, long before Neolithic farming’, PLoS
ONE, vol. 10, no. 7, e0131422. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0131422.
Stringer, C 2012, Te Origin of Our Species. Penguin Books, London.
Wikipedia 2015, ‘Australopithecus afarensis,’                                                      ‘Ecological footprint,’            ‘Extinction,’                    ‘Fertile
Crescent,’ ‘History of agriculture,’ ‘History of climate change science,’ ‘Homo erectus,’ ‘Homo
heidelbergensis,’ ‘Human evolution,’ ‘List of countries by ecological footprint,’ ‘Multiregional
origin of modern humans,’ ‘Neanderthal,’ ‘Old man’s beard in New Zealand,’ ‘Recent African
origin of modern humans,’ ‘Tylacine,’ https://en.wikipedia.org/
Zeder, MA 2015, ‘Core questions in domestication research’, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, vol. 112, no. 11, pp. 3191-3198.
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
Length: 1O MONTHS
THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
PROFESSIONAL GOALS
Format: FULL-TIME
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
EXPERIENCE
#10 WORLDWIDE                                                                                      55 Nationalities
5 Specializations
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
Personalize your program                                                                           in class
FINANCIAL TIMES
www.ie.edu/master-management                                                                       mim.admissions@ie.edu              Follow us on IE MIM Experience
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
169
